OCR-APT: Reconstructing APT Stories from Audit Logs using
Subgraph Anomaly Detection and LLMs
Ahmed Aly

Essam Mansour

Amr Youssef

Concordia University
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
ahmed.aly.20211@mail.concordia.ca

Concordia University
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
essam.mansour@concordia.ca

Concordia University
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
youssef@ciise.concordia.ca

arXiv:2510.15188v2 [cs.CR] 20 Oct 2025

Abstract
Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) are stealthy cyberattacks that
often evade detection in system-level audit logs. Provenance graphs
model these logs as connected entities and events, revealing relationships that are missed by linear log representations. Existing
systems apply anomaly detection to these graphs but often suffer
from high false positive rates and coarse-grained alerts. Their reliance on node attributes like file paths or IPs leads to spurious
correlations, reducing detection robustness and reliability. To fully
understand an attack’s progression and impact, security analysts
need systems that can generate accurate, human-like narratives of
the entire attack. To address these challenges, we introduce OCRAPT, a system for APT detection and reconstruction of human-like
attack stories. OCR-APT uses Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for
subgraph anomaly detection, learning behavior patterns around
nodes rather than fragile attributes such as file paths or IPs. This
approach leads to a more robust anomaly detection. It then iterates over detected subgraphs using Large Language Models (LLMs)
to reconstruct multi-stage attack stories. Each stage is validated
before proceeding, reducing hallucinations and ensuring an interpretable final report. Our evaluations on the DARPA TC3, OpTC,
and NODLINK datasets show that OCR-APT outperforms state-ofthe-art systems in both detection accuracy and alert interpretability.
Moreover, OCR-APT reconstructs human-like reports that comprehensively capture the attack story.

CCS Concepts
• Security and privacy → Intrusion detection systems.

Keywords
Anomaly Detection, APT Attack Investigation, LLMs, GNNs

1

Introduction

Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) are among the most insidious forms of cyberattacks. Characterized by stealth, persistence,
and adaptability, APTs often evade traditional security mechanisms by exploiting zero-day vulnerabilities and maintaining longterm access through low-profile tactics [3]. As a result, detecting
and reconstructing these attacks from system-level audit logs remains a significant challenge for security analysts. Provenance
graphs—structured representations of system logs that encode interactions between processes, files, and network entities—offer a
promising way to visualize the causal relationships between system
© 2025 Copyright held by the authors. This is the authors’ extended version of the
paper accepted for publication at the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (CCS 2025). The final published version is available at
https://doi.org/10.1145/3719027.3765219.

activities [56, 90]. However, the complexity and size of these graphs
make human analysis infeasible without intelligent automation.
Security analysts not only require systems that can detect suspicious behaviors but also demand tools that support forensic investigation by reconstructing the complete attack story. Such reconstructions must provide interpretable, human-like reports that
map to APT attack stages. Existing systems typically fall short: they
generate fragmented outputs or overly technical graphs that are
difficult to parse and interpret. This gap motivates the need for
more robust and intelligible solutions that go beyond isolated alerts
and provide comprehensive insights into how an attack unfolded.

Limitations of Existing Detection Methods: Most prior efforts in
APT detection using provenance data fall into two broad categories: heuristic-based and anomaly-based approaches [39]. Heuristic methods rely on signatures or rules derived from known attacks [30, 59], but fail to detect novel threats. Anomaly-based methods, in contrast, identify deviations from expected behavior and thus
hold greater promise for detecting zero-day attacks [39, 77]. However, they frequently suffer from high false positive rates [29, 70],
producing voluminous alerts that burden security teams with triage
tasks. Furthermore, anomaly-based systems often operate at the
node level [40, 77, 83] or over the entire graph [29, 41, 57], which
creates practical limitations. Node-level alarms lack contextual information, making it difficult to interpret isolated anomalies. Graphlevel alarms, on the other hand, are too coarse, obscuring the specific
sequences and entities involved in an attack. Recent efforts [46, 70]
have shifted toward subgraph-based anomaly detection to strike
a balance between granularity and interpretability. These systems
identify small, connected sets of anomalous nodes to support better
investigation. However, they often rely heavily on fragile node
attributes like file paths or IPs, which are easy to obfuscate or
manipulate, thereby reducing detection robustness [8, 60].

Challenges in Attack Story Reconstruction: Beyond detection, reconstructing a coherent and human-understandable attack story remains a major unsolved challenge. Many existing systems [2, 23, 80]
assume prior knowledge in the form of Points-of-Interest (POIs),
such as manually flagged alerts or indicators. This reliance hinders
comprehensive log analysis. Moreover, the outputs of these systems
often consist of dense graphs or low-level event sequences that lack
narrative clarity. Without proper summarization or contextual linking of events to known attack stages—such as those in the MITRE
ATT&CK or APT kill-chain frameworks—these systems fail to serve
the needs of analysts conducting forensic investigations.

Ahmed Aly, Essam Mansour, and Amr Youssef

Our Approach: To address the above challenges, we propose
OCR-APT1 , a novel system that performs end-to-end reconstruction of APT stories from audit logs. OCR-APT consists of two key
components: a GNN-based subgraph anomaly detector, and an LLMbased attack investigator that generates interpretable attack stories.
The subgraph anomaly detector leverages a custom graph learning
model, OCRGCN, which integrates relational graph convolutional
networks (RGCNs) with one-class SVMs. This design captures behavioral patterns over structural relationships, allowing the system
to detect anomalies based on context rather than brittle attributes.
By training a separate model per node type, OCRGCN identifies
abnormal interactions with higher precision.
Detected anomalous nodes are then grouped into subgraphs
based on topological and behavioral coherence. Each subgraph
is scored for abnormality and filtered to retain those with high
investigative value. These subgraphs serve as the basis for the
second component: the attack investigator. This module applies a
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) approach to serialize the
subgraphs and pass them to a Large Language Model. By modularizing the reconstruction process into validated subtasks, OCR-APT
mitigates common issues like LLM hallucination [69]. The output
is a structured, stage-wise attack report that identifies Indicators of
Compromise (IOCs) and maps events to the APT kill-chain [59].
Impact and Evaluation. We evaluate OCR-APT on three
provenance graph datasets: DARPA TC3 [18], OpTC [19], and
NODLINK [46]. DARPA TC3 and OpTC are widely recognized
benchmarks that reflect realistic, enterprise-scale APT scenarios [90]. The NODLINK dataset provides a controlled simulation
environment for multi-stage APTs, enabling direct comparison with
state-of-the-art subgraph-based anomaly detection systems. Experimental results demonstrate that OCR-APT consistently outperforms
existing systems in both anomaly detection accuracy and the interpretability of generated alerts. Specifically, OCR-APT achieves
an average F1-score of 0.96, outperforming both NODLINK (0.248)
and FLASH (0.945), thereby advancing the state of subgraph-based
detection. Its performance is also comparable to or exceeds that of
node-level and time window-based anomaly detection methods.
Beyond quantitative gains, OCR-APT advances usability by producing concise, human-readable attack reports that reconstruct a
majority of the APT kill-chain stages. This capability bridges the
gap between low-level system telemetry and high-level analyst
reasoning. By combining graph learning with natural language
generation, OCR-APT delivers not only accurate detections but also
actionable insights—streamlining alert triage, reducing investigation time, and pushing the state of the art in APT detection and
analysis. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a GNN-based anomaly detection model
combined with a one-class classification to accurately
identify anomalous nodes and APT-related subgraphs in
provenance graphs.
• We introduce an LLM-driven investigation method that
reconstructs attack stories from audit logs and generates
concise, human-like reports.
1 OCR-APT:

detection

• We integrate these components into OCR-APT2 , a
complete APT detection and investigation system that
identifies anomalies, ranks alerts by severity, and produces
interpretable reports to support efficient analyst workflows.
• We conduct extensive evaluations on DARPA TC3, OpTC,
and NODLINK datasets. OCR-APT outperforms stateof-the-art anomaly detection systems and successfully
reconstructs multi-stage, human-like APT reports.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
reviews background and limitations of existing systems; Section 3
defines the threat model. Section 4 introduces our system, with
Sections 5 and 6 detailing the GNN-based detector and LLM-based
attack investigator, respectively. Evaluation results are in Section 7,
related work in Section 8, and conclusions in Section 9.

2

Background

Provenance graphs (PGs) are directed, heterogeneous graphs that
model audit logs to support causal analysis [56, 90]. They provide
a comprehensive view of system activities and information flow,
making them effective for uncovering attack traces [39]. A PG
consists of diverse node types—such as processes, files, and network
flows—linked by edges representing actions like read, write, and
execute. The exact schema depends on the underlying operating
system; our approach leverages all available node and edge types
per host. For example, Appendix A outlines the schema used for
FreeBSD-based hosts (CADETS). PGs also include event timestamps,
crucial for detecting APTs and reconstructing attack timelines [70],
as well as contextual node attributes like command-line arguments,
file paths, and IP addresses. These features enrich the analysis of
system behavior.

2.1

Limitations of Anomaly Detection Systems

Anomaly-based detection systems learn patterns of normal system
behavior and flag deviations as potential threats. In provenance
graph analysis, early approaches often detect anomalies at the
granularity of entire graphs using clustering [29, 57] or graph classification techniques [36, 41]. However, these methods struggle
with interpretability: the alarms often span PGs with millions of
nodes [39], despite only a small subset being relevant to the attack [46, 70]. This makes the investigation akin to “searching for a
needle in a haystack.” Additionally, such coarse-grained approaches
risk missing fine-grained anomalies, leading to false negatives [77].
To improve granularity, subsequent systems focus on paths [49,
76]. While more precise, these techniques often lose broader attack context [30]. More recent advancements target even finer
units—individual nodes [40, 77, 83], edges [87], time windows [16],
or subgraphs [46, 70]. Although these methods enhance interpretability, node- and edge-level systems can overwhelm analysts
with numerous isolated alerts lacking contextual history.
Subgraph-based systems like NODLINK [46] attempt to offer
better context by constructing coherent attack graphs using Steiner
Trees [37, 38]. However, NODLINK’s reliance on sentence embeddings [11] limits precision, often resulting in false positives. Moreover, NODLINK relies on node attributes features that may introduce spurious correlations—a common issue in cybersecurity ML,

One-Class Relational graph convolutional networks for APT anomaly
2 Repository

for OCR-APT: https://github.com/CoDS-GCS/OCR-APT

OCR-APT: Reconstructing APT Stories from Audit Logs using Subgraph
Anomaly Detection and LLMs

where models learn artifacts (e.g., specific IP ranges) instead of
generic attack patterns [8]. FLASH [70] and KAIROS [16] follow
similar strategies, using GNNs with node attributes such as process
names, command-line arguments, file paths, and IP addresses to
inform embeddings. While these semantic features improve detection accuracy, they are also vulnerable to adversarial manipulation,
as attackers can change surface-level attributes without altering
attack behavior [60]. To counteract this vulnerability, OCR-APT
takes a novel approach by avoiding reliance on node attributes.
Instead, it uses structural and behavioral features to strengthen
robustness against evasion tactics. This strategy ensures consistent
anomaly detection, making OCR-APT more accurate and reliable
than existing subgraph-level systems, which still struggle with false
positives and adversarial manipulation.

Methodological Limitations. Current anomaly detection methods
commonly rely on two paradigms: autoencoders [16, 40, 46, 83]
and node-type classification [70, 77]. Autoencoders are memoryintensive due to the need to reconstruct large adjacency matrices [52]. In node-type classification, a node is flagged as anomalous if its predicted type (e.g., process, file, network flow) differs
from the expected one. However, this assumption does not always
hold, as each node type exhibits distinct behavioral patterns. For
example, process nodes perform distinct actions that reveal their
type, so a malicious process may still be correctly classified and
evade detection. OCR-APT mitigates this issue by avoiding typebased classification. Instead, it directly classifies nodes as normal
or anomalous based on their behavioral patterns, using a one-class
SVM [12]. This one-class classification approach identifies outliers
without relying on labeled attack data, enabling the detection of
previously unseen attack behaviors.
Moreover, prior works [70, 77] employ GNN models originally
designed for homogeneous graphs, such as GraphSAGE [28], which
do not consider edge types (i.e., node actions) during embedding
computation. As a result, they overlook critical structural context.
While GNNs have been actively explored for anomaly detection,
the heterogeneous nature of PGs remains underexplored [42]. OCRAPT addresses this gap by using RGCNs [72] to embed nodes while
preserving the heterogeneous structure of PGs. Unlike previous
methods, OCR-APT incorporates node actions directly into node
embeddings, which allows it to account for complex relationships
between nodes in attack scenarios. Section 7.4.2 compares OCRAPT with other GNN-based baselines, demonstrating its superior
performance in terms of both precision and recall.

Efficiency Considerations. Scalability is critical for handling largescale enterprise provenance data. While prior systems propose
graph reduction and subgraph extraction techniques [4, 5, 33], OCRAPT introduces a memory-efficient approach tailored specifically to
anomaly detection. Instead of extracting graphs from known IOCs,
OCR-APT constructs causally relevant subgraphs around detected
anomalous nodes using three efficient graph queries. This method
avoids the need to load the entire PG into memory, which is essential
for supporting deployment in resource-constrained environments
and ensuring scalability.

2.2

Limitations of Attack Investigation Systems

Attack investigation systems support post-alert analysis by helping security analysts validate threats and understand the attacker’s actions [39]. Key challenges include triaging high-priority
alerts [31, 32], clustering related alerts [74, 86], and reconstructing
comprehensive attack stories from low-level logs [2, 16, 23, 46, 80].
Many reconstruction systems rely on pre-identified POIs [23,
74, 80] or known attack entities [2] as seeds for investigation. This
dependence limits generalization: if the initial POI is inaccurate, the
derived attack story may be misleading. For instance, ATLAS [2]
trains an LSTM-based model on simulated attack sequences. If the
starting entity is misclassified, the entire reconstruction may be
compromised. Such systems are often unable to detect novel threats
outside the scope of their training data. Rule-based systems [33, 59]
suffer similar drawbacks, as predefined patterns can only capture
known attacks. They are ineffective against polymorphic APTs that
exhibit diverse behaviors [29, 39, 77].
Narrative Complexity. Most existing tools generate either attack
graphs [9, 33, 46, 59, 68, 80] or attack sequences [2, 23]. While
informative, these representations are often complex and hard to
interpret, requiring significant analyst effort to extract key insights.
Graphs, in particular, pose challenges for visualization and manual
inspection [16]. Some approaches focus on alert clustering [54, 74,
86], grouping similar alerts to reduce manual workload. However,
they typically lack narrative coherence and contextual depth, which
are essential for understanding multi-stage APTs. In contrast, OCRAPT introduces a novel LLM-based module that generates highquality, human-like attack reports, offering coherent summaries of
attack behavior. These reports not only reduce analyst burden but
also improve the effectiveness and speed of APT investigations by
providing a clear, interpretable story that can easily guide further
analysis and response.

3

Threat Model

This study focuses on detecting APTs characterized by a “low and
slow” attack approach [29]. While our threat model acknowledges
that attackers may use sophisticated zero-day exploits to compromise the system, we assume they must leave distinguishable traces
in the system logs. The proposed system requires system logs that
are free from attack traces for training. Consistent with previous
work, we consider audit logs and kernel-space auditing frameworks
as part of our trusted computing base [2, 5, 40, 59, 87]. Attacks involving data poisoning, hardware-level attacks, and side-channel
attacks are beyond the scope of this study.

4

Proposed System Architecture

This section presents the architecture of our OCR-APT system,
shown in Figure 1. Each component of OCR-APT is designed to
address key limitations identified in existing anomaly detection
and attack investigation systems (Section 2.1), and together they
achieve our research objectives: fine-grained anomaly detection,
resistance to adversarial evasion, scalability to enterprise-scale data,
and automated, interpretable threat investigation.

Ahmed Aly, Essam Mansour, and Amr Youssef

Retrieve
Human-like
Attack Reports

Augment

Provenance Graph
Construction
Audit Logs

PG

Encoding &
Features Extraction

Graph
DB

PG

SG
Query

Subgraph Anomaly Detector
PYG

GNN-Based
OCRGCN Model

Generate

Anomalous Subgraphs
Construction

A-Nodes

A-SGs

LLM-based Attack
Investigator

Figure 1: Overall architecture of OCR-APT. This includes constructing provenance graphs (PG), extracting features and encoding
the graph into a PyTorch Geometric data object (PYG), detecting anomalous nodes (A-Nodes) with our GNN-based model
(OCRGCN), identifying anomalous subgraphs (A-SGs), and generating a human-like APT attack report using LLMs.
To address the scalability and memory-efficiency limitations of
existing systems, OCR-APT represents audit logs as an RDF-based3
provenance graph (PG) and loads them incrementally into an RDF
graph database using a disk-backed ingestion strategy [5]. The RDF
model encodes system activity as triples of the form ⟨subject,
predicate, object⟩, where predicate denotes an event, and
subject and object are system entities. This representation enables scalable graph construction and efficient query-based subgraph extraction, overcoming the limitations of systems that require
the entire graph to be held in memory.
To address the interpretability challenges of coarse-grained
anomaly detection, OCR-APT extracts behavior-based features for
each node, including actions, effects, and timing statistics. Normalization ensures consistency across entities, supporting generalized
behavior learning. The graph is then encoded for GNN-based modeling. The encoded graph is passed to the subgraph anomaly detector,
which overcomes limitations of prior methods, such as reliance on
attribute embeddings or autoencoders, by combining node-level
anomaly detection with context-aware subgraph analysis. Using
OCRGCN, a one-class GNN trained on benign data, it identifies
anomalous nodes based on structural and behavioral features without labeled attacks. To improve interpretability and reduce alert
fatigue, OCR-APT constructs causally coherent subgraphs around
detected anomalies using efficient SPARQL queries. Each subgraph
is scored, and those above a threshold are flagged, providing precise
and context-rich alerts without static rules.
To support effective post-alert investigation and narrative reconstruction, anomalous subgraphs are passed to the attack investigator module, which uses LLMs to generate concise, humanreadable attack reports. It serializes each subgraph into a timestampordered description, summarizes it via LLM prompts to extract IOCs,
key actions, and APT kill chain stages, and then composes a complete attack narrative. This report is further enriched through a
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) pipeline that queries the
graph for additional context. By integrating precise anomaly detection with automated investigation, OCR-APT reduces false positives,
enhances interpretability, and scales to large, heterogeneous provenance graphs—effectively addressing the core challenges outlined
in our research objectives.

3 RDF:

Resource Description Framework graph model [71]

5

GNN-based Subgraph Anomaly Detection

This section introduces the subgraph anomaly detector, outlining
the OCRGCN architecture and subgraph construction algorithm.

5.1

The GNN-based model

The GNN-based model acts as the core component of OCR-APT’s
subgraph anomaly detection pipeline. Figure 2 illustrates the
model’s architecture, highlighting its training and inference phases.
5.1.1 The model architecture. Our OCRGCN uses an RGCN-based
architecture [72] to capture both graph structure and node behavior by incorporating edge types during the embedding aggregation
process. To prevent spurious correlations [8], OCRGCN avoids using node attributes such as IP addresses or file paths, which can
cause the model to memorize specific malicious instances rather
than learn generalizable attack patterns. While excluded from the
model’s input, these attributes are retained for the investigation
phase, where they assist analysts in interpreting and verifying alerts.
Each layer of the model aggregates information from a node’s onehop neighborhood. Nodes exchange messages with their neighbors,
embedding information about node types, actions, and initial extracted features, and then update their embeddings based on the
aggregated data. After multiple RGCN layers, the model produces
a final embedding vector for each node in the provenance graph.
These embeddings are then passed to a one-class SVM, which learns
a hypersphere that encloses the majority of normal node embeddings. An anomaly score is computed based on the distance of each
node’s embedding from the center of this hypersphere. Nodes whose
scores exceed the hypersphere’s radius are flagged as anomalous.
5.1.2 Training Phase. The training begins by extracting behaviorbased features from benign provenance graphs, including action
frequencies and idle period statistics. Action frequencies reflect
behavioral tendencies by computing the proportion of each action
type relative to the total number of actions per node. Unlike prior
work that uses raw action counts [77], we apply L2 normalization
to reduce bias from high-activity benign nodes and allow the model
to focus on behavioral patterns (i.e., scaling the action frequency
vector so that the sum of squared values equals one). For example,
while a frequently used browser may establish many connections,
its overall behavior is normal when considering the ratio of connections to other actions like sends, receives, reads, and writes.

OCR-APT: Reconstructing APT Stories from Audit Logs using Subgraph
Anomaly Detection and LLMs
Training Phase

Inference Phase

OCRGCN Model

One Class SVM

One Class SVM

Hypersphere

Benign PG
Process

Encoding
&
Features
Extraction

File

Estimate
Contamination

Multi-Layers
of RGCN

...

OCRGCN Model

Estimate
Contamination

...

Benign Nodes

Network
Flow

Estimate
Contamination

Process
OCRGCN
(Process)

Multi-Layers
of RGCN

OCRGCN
(Process)

...

One Class SVM
Node
Embedding

OCRGCN Model
Multi-Layers
of RGCN

Attack PG

Node
Embedding

Encoding
&
File
Features
Extraction

OCRGCN
(File)

Anomalous
Nodes & their
Anomaly Scores

OCRGCN
(File)

...

One Class SVM

Node
Embedding

One Class SVM

One Class SVM

Network
Flow
OCRGCN
(Network Flow)

Benign Nodes

Malicious Nodes

OCRGCN
(Network Flow)

Figure 2: Architecture of the OCRGCN model. The training phase (left) involves encoding benign provenance graphs, estimating
contamination factors, learning node embeddings via RGCN layers, and learning the normal hypersphere with a one-class
SVM. The inference phase (right) uses the trained models to compute anomaly scores and detect anomalous nodes.
Conversely, a process with an unusually high rate of sending or execution may indicate suspicious behavior. Idle period statistics are
derived from event timestamps and include minimum, maximum,
and average durations between actions. These statistics are normalized to a 0–1 range using a min-max scaler, based on the dataset’s
minimum and maximum values. APT-related nodes tend to remain
idle longer than benign nodes, making idle period statistics a key
indicator. These two features capture key aspects of node behavior
and assist in detecting malicious patterns. Importantly, OCR-APT
does not rely solely on these raw features; its GNN aggregates them
within the graph structure, enabling node representations to reflect
both behavioral patterns and structural context. We conducted additional experiments to evaluate alternative temporal features, but
ultimately excluded them due to poor generalization across hosts;
further details are provided in Appendix E.
After feature extraction, the system splits nodes by type and
trains a specific OCRGCN for each type to improve detection accuracy, as normal behavior varies across node types. Each OCRGCN
is trained on a single node type but aggregates messages from all
neighboring types, preserving cross-type semantics. Following this,
each model learns a hypersphere specific to a given node type,
enabling anomaly detection tailored to the normal behavior of that
type without losing cross-type interaction information. Distinct
models also enable precise estimation of the contamination factor,
which represents the expected proportion of anomalies. This factor
is estimated as the proportion of malicious nodes in the validation
set, constrained between 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛 and 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑐𝑜𝑛 . The maximum constraint ensures the contamination factor aligns with the stealthy
nature of APTs. If the validation set contains many malicious nodes,
the contamination factor is set to 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑐𝑜𝑛 . The minimum constraint
ensures the factor is above zero, even when no malicious nodes
are present. If no labeled data is available, the system uses 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛
as the contamination factor, relying solely on trusted benign logs
reflecting normal behavior.
Each OCRGCN model learns a hypersphere that encloses most
normal nodes for a specific type and computes the anomaly score
threshold based on the contamination factor. The fraction of training nodes allowed outside the hypersphere is controlled by the
hyperparameter 𝛽, fixed across all node types. If too many nodes
are enclosed, the hypersphere becomes too large, reducing its ability

to detect anomalies. The goal is to capture the norm of benign nodes
without overfitting. During training, the RGCN model updates its
weights to bring normal nodes closer together in the embedding
space, while the one-class SVM adjusts the hypersphere’s center
and radius to fit the normal node embeddings. Training stops early
based on the validation set’s F1-score, and if no malicious nodes
are present, training halts when the true negative rate declines.
5.1.3 Inference Phase. During inference, the system processes
provenance graphs containing both benign and malicious traces.
It applies the same pre-processing steps to extract features and
assigns each node to its corresponding OCRGCN model based on
its type. The OCRGCN models compute anomaly scores for the
test nodes, and those exceeding the pre-computed threshold are
classified as anomalous. Finally, these anomalous nodes and their
scores are passed to the subgraph construction module.

5.2

Anomalous Subgraph Construction

OCR-APT constructs anomalous subgraphs using Algorithm 1. The
algorithm takes as input a set of anomalous nodes, a connection to
the provenance graph database, and two parameters: 𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 , which
specifies the number of seed nodes for each node type, and 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑒 ,
the maximum number of edges allowed in each subgraph. It begins
by querying the graph database to retrieve direct connections between anomalous nodes and their one-hop neighbors to form an
initial subgraph (lines 3-5). This is done with three SPARQL queries:
one for direct edges between anomalous nodes, and two for their
neighboring nodes and edges, minimizing traversal overhead.
The nodes are next ranked by anomaly scores, and the top 𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑
nodes of each type are selected as seeds (lines 6–7). For each seed,
the algorithm performs a 1-hop bidirectional traversal (line 9), connecting anomalous nodes through intermediate normal ones to
preserve their context. It then retains only the paths that lead to
anomalous nodes and constructs a candidate subgraph (lines 10–11),
limiting the inclusion of benign nodes. Figure 3 illustrates this process: it begins with individual anomalous nodes, links them via
direct connections when possible, expands each by one hop to capture surrounding context, and then prunes paths that do not lead
to additional anomalies. The figure shows how anomalous nodes
(in red and orange) are connected through normal nodes (in blue),
with misclassified nodes (in brown) also identified.

Ahmed Aly, Essam Mansour, and Amr Youssef

Detected Anomalous Nodes

1-hop Neighbourhood

Direct Connections

Constructed Anomalous Subgraphs

Detected Anomalous (Malicious)

Detected Anomalous (Malicious)

Detected Anomalous (Malicious)

Predicted Normal (Malicious)

Detected Anomalous (Malicious)

Predicted Normal (Malicious)

Detected Anomalous (Benign)

Detected Anomalous (Benign)

Detected Anomalous (Benign)

Predicted Normal (Benign)

Detected Anomalous (Benign)

Predicted Normal (Benign)

Figure 3: The stages of constructing anomalous subgraphs. OCR-APT starts from anomalous nodes, connects them by direct
connections, gets all one-hop neighbor nodes, and keeps only neighbors that lead to other anomalous nodes.
Algorithm 1 Anomalous Subgraphs Construction Algorithm
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:
23:
24:

Input: Provenance Graph Database (𝐷𝐵𝑃𝐺 ), Anomalous Nodes
(𝐴𝑁 𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠 ), 𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 , 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑒
Output: Anomalous Subgraphs (𝐴𝑆𝐺𝑠 )
Query direct connections between 𝐴𝑁 𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠 from 𝐷𝐵𝑃𝐺
Query 1-hop neighbors of 𝐴𝑁 𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠 from 𝐷𝐵𝑃𝐺
Construct an initial subgraph (𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑆𝐺 )
Sort 𝐴𝑁 𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠 based on their anomaly scores
Identify 𝑆𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑠 as top 𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 𝐴𝑁 𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠 per node type
for every 𝑆𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑠 do
Traverse 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑆𝐺 for 1-hop forward and backwards
Keep only paths that lead to unvisited 𝐴𝑁 𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠
Construct a subgraph (𝑠𝑔)
if 𝑠𝑔𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑠 <= 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑒 then
Add 𝑠𝑔 to to the Anomalous Subgraphs (𝐴𝑆𝐺𝑠 ) list
else
Partition 𝑠𝑔 into smaller subgraphs within 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑒
Add partitioned subgraphs to 𝐴𝑆𝐺𝑠
end if
end for
Filter out identical subgraphs in 𝐴𝑆𝐺𝑠
for every 𝐴𝑆𝐺𝑠 do
Compute the subgraph anomaly score
Determine the subgraph abnormality level (𝑠𝑔𝑎𝑏 )
end for
Filter out subgraphs with minor 𝑠𝑔𝑎𝑏 from 𝐴𝑆𝐺𝑠

Once a candidate subgraph is formed, it is either added directly
to the set of anomalous subgraphs if it stays within the edge limit
𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑒 , or partitioned into smaller subgraphs (lines 12–17). The Louvain community detection algorithm [10] is used for partitioning.
This ensures manageable subgraph sizes for analysis and helps the
LLM-based attack investigation maintain narrative coherence. Partitioning does not affect investigation quality, as the LLM-based investigator summarizes each partition individually and merges them
into a comprehensive attack report. Some cross-partition edges may
be omitted, but the overall attack scenario remains intact. After
processing all seed nodes, duplicate subgraphs are removed (line
19) and an anomaly score is computed for each subgraph (line 21).
This score is the sum of the scores of its anomalous nodes. The subgraphs are then mapped to abnormality levels using a logarithmic

scale (line 22), and those with low abnormality are filtered out (line
24), reducing false positives. The final set of anomalous subgraphs
can be adjusted based on the desired abnormality threshold for
further investigation.

6 LLM-Based Attack Investigation
6.1 The Limits of LLMs in Attack Investigation
To enable LLM-based attack investigation, we examined how LLMs
perform when tasked with reconstructing attack stories from system audit logs. This reconstruction process demands high-level
reasoning, contextual understanding, and the interpretation of subtle event patterns. We found that LLMs struggle to generate highquality of human-like reports when asked to perform this task
in a single step. Our initial approach used a monolithic prompt
to generate full reports directly from anomalous subgraphs, but
this often led to hallucinated content, overlooked APT stages, and
missing IOCs. These limitations persisted even when evaluating on
benchmark datasets that may have been seen during pretraining.
This shows the inherent difficulty of complex and analyst-level
investigative tasks when attempted all at once.
To address these challenges, we first incorporated Chain-ofThought (CoT) prompting [79], embedding explicit reasoning steps
to help the model logically interpret each subgraph. This improved
the coherence of the report and increased the coverage of the APT
stage, but hallucinations and factual errors remained. We then designed a multi-stage prompting pipeline that decomposes the investigation into smaller, well-defined subtasks, such as IOC extraction,
APT stage mapping, and context summarization. Each stage employs a focused CoT-based prompt, enhanced by in-context learning
with domain-specific instructions and CTI concepts. This enables
the LLM to reason more effectively within a constrained scope.
Building on these insights, we designed a complete LLM-driven
attack investigation mechanism, called attack investigator. It implements our multi-stage prompting strategy within a RetrievalAugmented Generation (RAG) framework. Each stage uses tailored
CoT-based prompts and is connected by an automatic validation
mechanism that ensures consistency and preserves report integrity.
This design not only improves investigative performance by capturing more attack stages, but also fully mitigates hallucinations
observed in the earlier approach. This modular pipeline, with explicit reasoning and automatic validation, improves the overall

OCR-APT: Reconstructing APT Stories from Audit Logs using Subgraph
Anomaly Detection and LLMs

LLM

Anomalous
Subgraphs

Log Documents

LLM

svchost.exe COMMAND a shell on
09-24 11:32.
svchost.exe START the flow:
202.6.172.98 on 09-24 11:32.
svchost.exe TERMINATE
svchost.exe on 09-24 13:37.
..............
.......................

...
Serialize

svchost.exe READ the file: wifitask
(2 times) on 09-24 11:45.
svchost.exe CREATE the process:
svchost.exe on 09-25 02:59.
..............
....................

Retrieve IOCs
list from the
document (ID)

["202.6.172.98",
"142.20.57.246",
"svchost.exe"]

...
Vector
Store
{Logs}

Indexing

["conhost.exe",
"svchost.exe",
"python.exe"]

Filter
Hallucinations

Summarize the
document (ID) into
an attack report

LLM
LLM

The logs indicate a series of
suspicious activities primarily
executed by the process
svchost.exe across multiple
incidents on September 24
and 25, 2019. ....................

["202.6.172.98",
"powershell.exe",
"svchost.exe"]

...

...
The attack appears to have
been executed in a
systematic manner, .........
The consistent interaction
with the IP address
202.6.172.98 raises
significant concerns
regarding data exfiltration. ....

Retrieve IOCs
list for each
APT stage

Vector
Store
{Reports}
Indexing

["plink.exe",
"lsass.exe"]

Filter
Hallucinations

Summarize all reports
into a comprehensive
attack report

The attack began with the execution of
svchost.exe, which was frequently used to
create shells and establish outbound
communications with known malicious IP
addresses, specifically 202.6.172.98 and
142.20.57.246. This behavior suggests the
establishment of a command and control
channel, indicative of an initial compromise.
The attacker executed commands to create
and manipulate processes, including the
creation of multiple files and modules, which
points to efforts to maintain persistence on the
compromised system.
...............................................
Indicators of Compromise (IOCs):
IP Addresses : 202.6.172.98 (C&C server) /
142.20.57.246
Processes : svchost.exe / powershell.exe /
plink.exe / lsass.exe / wmiprvse.exe /
winlogon.exe / cmd.exe

LLM
Judge

Identify highest
priority IOC per
node type

Extract the IOC's
context subgraph
Query
SG

Serialize, index,
retrieve, and
summarize context
Provenacne
to enrich the
Graph DB
final attack report

Figure 4: Architecture of the LLM-based attack investigator. The system serializes anomalous subgraphs into log documents,
indexes them in a vector store, and uses an LLM to generate attack reports. It identifies key IOCs, enriches reports with context
subgraphs, and produces a comprehensive report for analysts. The visualized reports are simplified versions of the recovered
report from host 501 in the DARPA OpTC dataset.
quality and completeness of the generated attack reports. Hence,
our approach enables reliable and context-aware attack report generation that accelerates attack investigations.

Algorithm 2 Attack Reports Generation Algorithm
1:
2:

6.2

Our Attack Investigator Mechanism

We have designed the attack investigator to reconstruct attacks via
a RAG-based pipeline consisting of six stages, as shown in Figure 4.
The pipeline transforms detected anomalous subgraphs into humanlike attack reports, which capture the main stages of the attack story.
In the first stage, anomalous subgraphs are serialized into event
log documents and indexed in a vector store. These serialized logs
provide a structured representation of the subgraphs for further
processing. Stage two involves using an LLM to extract IOCs from
each serialized subgraph stored in the vector store. To prevent
hallucinations, the system validates the extracted IOCs by checking
whether they appear in the corresponding anomalous subgraphs.
This ensures that only verified IOCs are retained for subsequent
stages. In stage three, the LLM generates an attack report for each
subgraph based on the validated IOCs. These reports are indexed
into a separate vector store, making them easily retrievable. The
final comprehensive attack report is reconstructed in stages four
and five. In stage four, the LLM extracts a list of IOCs for each APT
stage from all generated attack reports. These individual reports
are merged into a comprehensive attack report, as shown in the
red box in Figure 4.
The final stage enriches the comprehensive report by iterating
over the most critical IOCs. The system employs a mechanism
called llm-as-a-judge [89] to identify the most significant IOCs. The
system then queries the provenance graph database to retrieve the
contextual information for each identified IOC, which is in the form
of connected anomalous subgraphs. Each subgraph provides crucial
attack context, which is integrated into the comprehensive report.
This process enhances the detection of additional APT stages.

6.3

Attack Report Generation

The attack investigator generates attack reports using Algorithm 2,
which takes anomalous subgraphs as input and produces a comprehensive narrative that reconstructs the attack story at the subgraph

3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:
23:
24:
25:

Input: Provenance Graph Database (𝐷𝐵 PG ), Anomalous Subgraphs (𝐴𝑆𝐺𝑠 )
Output: Attack Reports (𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑘 ), Comprehensive Attack Report
(𝑅comp )
Serialize 𝐴𝑆𝐺𝑠 into log documents (𝐴𝑆𝐺 docs )
Index 𝐴𝑆𝐺 docs in a vector store for logs (𝑉 𝑆𝑡 logs )
Initialize LLM chat engine (𝐿𝐿𝑀chat ) with instructions
for each 𝐴𝑆𝐺 doc in 𝐴𝑆𝐺 docs do
Extract 𝐼𝑂𝐶 lst using 𝐿𝐿𝑀chat from 𝑉 𝑆𝑡 logs
Filter hallucinations in 𝐼𝑂𝐶 lst
Summarize 𝐴𝑆𝐺 doc using 𝐿𝐿𝑀chat , append into 𝑅atk
Reset 𝐿𝐿𝑀chat memory
end for
Index 𝑅atk in a vector store for reports (𝑉 𝑆𝑡𝑅 )
Extract 𝐼𝑂𝐶 lst per APT stage from 𝑅atk using 𝐿𝐿𝑀chat
Filter hallucinations in 𝐼𝑂𝐶 lst
Summarize 𝑅atk into 𝑅comp using 𝐿𝐿𝑀chat
Initialize LLM as a judge (𝐿𝐿𝑀judg ) with instructions
for each 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 type in [‘IP’, ‘PROCESS’, ‘FILE’] do
Prompt 𝐿𝐿𝑀judg to select most critical 𝐼𝑂𝐶 in 𝑅comp
Query 𝐷𝐵 PG to retrieve 𝐼𝑂𝐶 context
Serialize 𝐼𝑂𝐶 context and index it in 𝑉 𝑆𝑡 logs
Extract 𝐼𝑂𝐶 lst per APT stage using 𝐿𝐿𝑀chat
Filter hallucinations in 𝐼𝑂𝐶 lst
Summarize context using 𝐿𝐿𝑀chat , append into 𝑅atk
Enrich 𝑅comp with the report using 𝐿𝐿𝑀chat
end for

level. Each detected anomalous subgraph represents a fragment
of the broader attack scenario. The algorithm begins by serializing each subgraph into a chronological sequence of events (line
3). This process converts the subgraph’s edges into natural language sentences that encode subject and object attributes, the action
performed, and the associated timestamps. During serialization, a
reduction phase condenses duplicate actions occurring within onesecond intervals into a more compact representation. For instance,
if a process repeatedly reads the same file, the output records the

Ahmed Aly, Essam Mansour, and Amr Youssef

action once, noting the number of repetitions (e.g., “read X times”).
Timestamps are simplified from microseconds to seconds to reduce
token overhead and streamline the LLM input.
The serialized subgraph (log document) is segmented into sentence chunks. Embeddings for each chunk are computed and indexed into a vector store (line 4). This enables the LLM to efficiently
retrieve relevant context from log documents. We use the ‘textembedding-3-large’ model [65] for indexing, due to its superior
performance [15]. The algorithm then configures the LLM with
domain-specific instructions for attack investigation (line 5). These
instructions guide the model’s reasoning by narrowing its focus to
concepts from operating system security, Cyber Threat Intelligence
(CTI), and APT kill-chain stages. They also define key terms, such as
IOCs and APT stages, emphasize the importance of avoiding hallucinations, and require the model to produce high-quality, human-like
narratives. The task is framed as summarizing detection alerts into
concise reports that include: (1) a summary of attack behavior, (2)
a breakdown of APT stages, (3) identified IOCs with context, and
(4) a minute-by-minute action log. The full set of instructions and
prompts is provided in Appendix B.
To enhance performance, the reconstruction process is modularized into subtasks, enabling the LLM to focus on one task at a
time. First, the model extracts IOCs from the serialized document
(𝐴𝑆𝐺 doc ) using a dedicated prompt (𝑝 ioc ) as shown in Equation 1:
{𝐼𝑂𝐶𝑖 } = 𝑓 (𝐴𝑆𝐺 doc, 𝑝 ioc )
(1)
This modular design allows the system to validate extracted
IOCs and filter out hallucinations. Specifically, any IOCs not found
in the source document are excluded (line 8). The validated IOCs
({𝐼𝑂𝐶𝑖 }′ ) are then used to guide the LLM in generating an attack
report (𝑅atk ) using prompt 𝑝 sum (line 9), as shown in Equation 2.
After generating each report, the system resets the LLM’s memory
to avoid cross-document contamination (line 10).
𝑅atk = 𝑓 (𝐴𝑆𝐺 doc, {𝐼𝑂𝐶𝑖 }′, 𝑝 sum )
(2)
Once all subgraphs have been processed, the reports (𝑅atk ) are
indexed, and the LLM is prompted to extract IOCs per APT stage
(𝑠𝑡𝑔), supporting the creation of a unified attack report (𝑅comp ) (lines
12–15):
(𝑖 )
(𝑖 )
{𝐼𝑂𝐶 stg
} = 𝑓 ({𝑅atk
}, 𝑠𝑡𝑔, 𝑝 ioc,stg )

(3)

(𝑖 )
(𝑖 ) ′
𝑅comp = 𝑓 ({𝑅atk
}, {𝐼𝑂𝐶 stg
} , 𝑝 comp )
(4)
To further enrich 𝑅comp , the system applies a RAG-based process.
It begins by initializing an LLM “judge” guided by expert-level
instructions (line 16). This step enables the fully automated pipeline
to evaluate the generated content. The judge LLM selects the most
critical IOC per node type using 𝑝 judg (lines 17–18):

𝐼𝑂𝐶 = 𝑓 (𝑅comp, 𝑝 judg )
(5)
The system then queries the provenance graph to extract subgraphs centered on the selected IOCs (line 19). Graph traversal
is limited to one-hop anomalous nodes, filtering out benign context—especially relevant when attackers use “living-off-the-land”
techniques by exploiting legitimate system processes. Since such
nodes can produce excessive benign context, the filter helps keep

Table 1: Statistics of DARPA TC3, DARPA OpTC, and Simulated NODLINK datasets
Dataset
DARPA
TC3
DARPA
OpTC
Simulated
NodLink

Host

# Nodes

# Edges

# Nodes
Types

# Edges
Types

# Malicious
Nodes

CADETS
TRACE
THEIA
201
501
51
Ubuntu
WS12
W10

696.37 K
2.48 M
642.56 K
788.24 K
1.14 M
720.40 K
23.04 K
10.86 K
62.16 K

8.66 M
6.98 M
18.82 M
5.84 M
8.29 M
4.98 M
14.04 M
8.27 M
7.89 M

6
11
4
8
8
7
3
3
3

28
24
18
20
20
19
13
6
6

12.81 K
67.38 K
25.32 K
71
418
200
21
47
191

the investigation focused. Finally, the extracted context subgraphs
(𝐼𝑂𝐶 ctx ) are indexed, and used to augment the comprehensive report
using prompt 𝑝 aug (lines 20–25):
′
= 𝑓 (𝑅comp, 𝐼𝑂𝐶 ctx, 𝑝 aug )
𝑅comp

(6)

′
The final report, 𝑅comp
, offers an accurate reconstruction of the
attack story. Analysts can interact with the system by posing followup questions to the LLM, such as assessing the security context of a
specific entity, evaluating the likelihood of exploitation, or differentiating between malicious and benign behaviors in the subgraphs.
They may also identify additional IOCs for further investigation.
Overall, attack investigator supports analysts with a user-friendly
and effective interface for in-depth incident analysis.

7

Evaluation

This section presents a comprehensive evaluation of OCR-APT.
We compare its detection accuracy with state-of-the-art (SOTA)
anomaly detection systems, excluding rule-based systems since they
target known attacks, while anomaly-based methods detect novel
threats. We also study the impact of core components on accuracy
via ablation and assess their computational cost. Finally, we evaluate
the quality of our LLM-based investigation by comparing generated
reports to ground truth reports from simulated attacks.

7.1

Datasets

We evaluated our system on three datasets: DARPA Transparent
Computing Engagement 3 (TC3) [18], DARPA Operationally Transparent Cyber (OpTC) [19], and NODLINK simulated dataset [46].
These datasets consist of audit logs collected from diverse operating
systems, with a total exceeding 80 million system events. Detailed
statistics for each dataset are summarized in Table 1. On average,
malicious nodes represent less than 0.01% of the total nodes, which
aligns with typical APT behaviors. Therefore, we used the F1-score
as the primary evaluation metric, as it effectively measures performance on highly imbalanced datasets [61].
7.1.1 DARPA TC3. The DARPA TC3 dataset, widely used as a
benchmark for provenance graph intrusion detection [90], was
developed to support research on APT-focused cybersecurity solutions [18]. Over two weeks, adversarial teams executed APT-based
attacks and documented their activities in ground truth reports [17].

OCR-APT: Reconstructing APT Stories from Audit Logs using Subgraph
Anomaly Detection and LLMs

These reports provide summaries of attack stages, key attack indicators, and detailed event logs with timestamps; however, they do
not specify the exact malicious system entities involved as groundtruth labels. Our evaluation covered two Linux-based hosts (THEIA
and TRACE) and one FreeBSD-based host (CADETS).
7.1.2 DARPA OpTC. The DARPA OpTC dataset includes data from
1,000 Windows OS hosts simulating a large enterprise environment [6, 19]. It spans seven days, with only benign activity during
the first four days. The final three days contain both benign and
malicious activity, where a red team conducts APT-style attacks.
These attacks cover the full APT lifecycle [20], including initial
compromise, internal reconnaissance, command & control, persistence, and trace-covering actions. Following prior studies [5, 70],
we focus our evaluation on the three hosts with the highest volume
of attack traces, based on the ground truth provided by FLASH. This
selection enables fair comparison with existing methods while still
presenting a challenging detection setting due to the low proportion
of malicious nodes (0.024%).
7.1.3 Simulated NODLINK. This dataset, released by
NODLINK [46], simulates the internal environment of a security company, Sangfor. Data were collected from three hosts:
an Ubuntu 20.04 server, a Windows Server 2012 (WS 12), and
a Windows 10 desktop host (W10). The dataset includes attack
descriptions and ground-truth labels, which we used in our
evaluation. This dataset enabled us to benchmark our system’s
performance against NODLINK.

7.2

Evaluation Setup

We train OCR-APT on benign traces (𝐷𝑏 ) collected from the provenance graph of a specific host. Then, we test OCR-APT using
graphs containing both malicious and benign traces, excluding
𝐷𝑏 . We ensure fair and consistent evaluation across the baselines
(THREATRACE [77], FLASH [70], MAGIC [40], and KAIROS [40])
using the same datasets, labels, and metrics. For NODLINK [46],
reproduction on DARPA TC3 was not possible due to the lack of
access to the specific data subset and ground truth labels used in
their evaluation. Instead, we relied on the reported TC3 results
and reproduced experiments on their simulated dataset using the
official system. We also reproduced some baselines: FLASH results
closely matched published ones, while THREATRACE showed high
variance (e.g., F1-score 0.595 ± 0.434 on TC3). We contacted the authors, who confirmed this instability. Therefore, we rely on original
papers to compare OCR-APT with each method’s best-performing
version. We follow the same evaluation setup as prior work [70, 77],
where true positives are anomalous nodes correctly identified as
abnormal or those with 2-hop neighbors flagged as abnormal. False
positives are benign nodes mistakenly flagged despite having no
anomalous nodes within two hops.
7.2.1 Parameter Setting. To optimize detection accuracy, we conducted a hyperparameter tuning experiment to select the default parameters, which were subsequently used in all our evaluations. For
our OCRGCN models, we implemented three layers of RGCN, utilizing a 32-dimensional embedding vector and a learning rate4 of 0.005.
4 The learning rate determines the step size for parameter updates during training [84].

The contamination factor was set to range between 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛 = 0.001
and 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑐𝑜𝑛 = 0.05. Following prior work [51], we set 𝛽 = 0.5.
The number of seed nodes 𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑 for subgraph construction was
set to 15, with a maximum of 5000 edges per subgraph (𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑒 ). We
assess the abnormality levels of the constructed subgraphs as follows. Subgraphs with an anomaly score below 10 are classified as
having minor abnormalities. Those with scores between 10 and
100 exhibit moderate abnormalities. Scores between 100 and 1000
indicate significant abnormalities, and scores exceeding 1000 are
categorized as critical. In our evaluation, subgraphs with moderate
abnormalities or higher are labeled as anomalous.
7.2.2 Infrastructure. Our experiments were conducted on a Linux
system equipped with 64 cores and 256 GB of RAM. We developed OCR-APT using Python and Bash scripts, leveraging PyTorch
Geometric [66] for training GNN models and NetworkX [7] for subgraph construction. Our OCRGCN is built on top of the PyGOD [51]
library. Provenance graphs are stored in the GraphDB [63] RDF
graph database, which supports the RDF-star format used in our
system [5]. We developed our RAG-based pipeline using LlamaIndex [50], which offers a vector store and API calls for various LLMs.
For our main LLM, we used GPT-4o-mini [64] with temperature
set to 0 to ensure accurate and deterministic results [73]. As part
of our ablation study, we tested OpenAI’s embedding models and
selected ‘text-embedding-3-large’ [65] for indexing due to its strong
performance. The entire system was implemented in approximately
5,000 lines of code.

7.3

Evaluation of Detection Accuracy

We compared OCR-APT with state-of-the-art (SOTA) anomaly detection systems across various granularities: nodes (THREATRACE
and MAGIC), time windows (KAIROS), and subgraphs (NODLINK
and FLASH). To enable unified evaluation, Table 2 reports the detection accuracy of all systems at the node level, where any node
within an anomalous time window or subgraph is labeled anomalous. Results for the SOTA systems are drawn from their original
papers5 . Overall, OCR-APT achieved comparable or superior accuracy to existing node-level detectors. However, these systems do
not support subgraph-level anomaly detection, which is essential
for our LLM-based investigator to reconstruct attack reports.
On the DARPA TC3 dataset, OCR-APT achieved higher recall
than KAIROS6 . KAIROS detects anomalies over 15-minute time
windows, each manually labeled based on ground truth. While it
attains 100% recall at the window level, its node-level recall caps
at 95%, likely due to malicious nodes falling outside the labeled
windows, which may contain both benign and malicious entities.
In contrast, OCR-APT provides comparable accuracy while operating at the subgraph level rather than fixed time windows. This
ensures that anomalous subgraphs consist only of causally connected anomalous nodes, incorporating benign nodes only when
they serve as bridges between anomalous events.
Detecting anomalies at the subgraph level improves alert validation and interpretability but is more challenging than node-level
5 As THREATRACE does not report evaluation results on the OpTC dataset, we present

the results produced and reported by FLASH.
6 KAIROS was also evaluated on the DARPA OpTC dataset, but its results were not
reported at the node level, preventing direct comparison.

Ahmed Aly, Essam Mansour, and Amr Youssef

Table 2: Detection accuracy of OCR-APT in comparison with
SOTA anomaly detection systems on DARPA TC3, DARPA
OpTC, and Simulated NODLINK datasets.

Dataset

TC3
(CADETS)

TC3
(TRACE)

TC3
(THEIA)

OpTC
(201)
OpTC
(501)
OpTC
(51)
NODLINK
(Ubuntu)
NODLINK
(WS 12)
NODLINK
(W10)

System

Precision

Recall

F1-Score

THREATRACE
MAGIC
KAIROS
NODLINK
FLASH
OCR-APT
THREATRACE
MAGIC
NODLINK
FLASH
OCR-APT
THREATRACE
MAGIC
KAIROS
NODLINK
FLASH
OCR-APT
THREATRACE
FLASH
OCR-APT
THREATRACE
FLASH
OCR-APT
THREATRACE
FLASH
OCR-APT
NODLINK
OCR-APT
NODLINK
OCR-APT
NODLINK
OCR-APT

0.90
0.94
1.00
0.14
0.95
1.00
0.72
0.99
0.25
0.95
1.00
0.87
0.98
1.00
0.23
0.93
1.00
0.84
0.90
1.00
0.85
0.94
1.00
0.86
0.94
0.89
0.04
0.95
0.10
0.74
0.14
0.95

0.99
0.99
0.95
1.00
0.99
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.99
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.95
1.00
0.99
1.00
0.85
0.92
0.88
0.87
0.92
1.00
0.87
0.92
0.77
0.38
1.00
0.84
0.93
0.68
0.99

0.95
0.97
0.97
0.25
0.97
1.00
0.83
0.99
0.40
0.97
1.00
0.93
0.99
0.97
0.37
0.96
1.00
0.84
0.91
0.94
0.86
0.93
1.00
0.86
0.93
0.82
0.07
0.97
0.17
0.82
0.23
0.97

detection. OCR-APT achieved perfect accuracy across all DARPA
TC3 hosts, whereas NODLINK struggled with a high false-positive
rate, reporting a maximum precision of just 0.25 on the TRACE
host. NODLINK uses sentence embeddings, which fail to capture
the graph structure. This limitation negatively impacts its accuracy,
as observed in the NODLINK dataset7 . In contrast, OCRGCN leverages both graph structure and node behavior, leading to superior
performance. OCR-APT consistently outperformed NODLINK, with
its lowest F1-score being 0.82 on the simulated WS 12 host. In this
case, OCR-APT missed 3 out of 47 malicious entities and produced
13 false positives among 10,860 benign nodes. Due to the small size
of the simulated dataset, minor errors had a considerable impact
on evaluation metrics. OCR-APT enhances interpretability through
subgraph-level detection without compromising accuracy.
7 As NODLINK’s authors did not provide per-host results on their simulated dataset,
we executed it using their public scripts and metrics without modification.

Overall, OCR-APT outperformed all detectors across all hosts,
except for OpTC 51, where FLASH achieved higher detection accuracy. In that case, the adversary launched a malicious upgrade
attack by installing a backdoored version of Notepad-Plus. During
the update process, the backdoor connected to the attacker’s server
to download both legitimate updates and a malicious binary. This
behavior confused the anomaly detection model, which failed to
flag the malicious binary. However, our LLM-based attack investigator successfully identified both the malicious binary and the
command-and-control server in the generated attack report. Furthermore, OCR-APT demonstrates greater robustness than SOTA
anomaly detection systems by avoiding reliance on node features
that are susceptible to adversarial manipulation.
Robustness to evasion remains a critical factor for anomaly detection systems. A growing concern in this area is mimicry attacks, where adversaries inject benign activities into attack graphs
to evade detection while preserving the core malicious behavior.
Provenance-based intrusion detection systems that operate at the
graph or path level have proven vulnerable to such tactics [25]. However, the same study suggests that focusing on finer-grained —such
as nodes, edges, or subgraphs—can mitigate this risk [25], a strategy that has shown promise in several recent systems [16, 70, 75].
OCR-APT’s subgraph-level detection naturally aligns with these
insights and offers a promising defense against such evasion. As
part of future work, we aim to assess its robustness against a broad
range of mimicry and evasion techniques [25, 60].

7.4

Ablation Study

This section evaluates OCRGCN against existing GNN-based anomaly detectors using the simulated NODLINK dataset, chosen for its
manageable size. Some baselines failed to run on larger datasets
(e.g., CADETS from DARPA TC3) due to memory constraints. We
also conduct ablation studies to assess the impact of key components and tune hyperparameters for optimal performance. Each
experiment is repeated 10 times, and average results are reported.
7.4.1 The OCRGCN Models. We developed six variations of OCRAPT: one with our GNN model, and the rest with existing
GNN-based anomaly detection models implemented using the
PyGOD [51] library. These models include AnomalyDAE [22],
CONAD [81], CoLA [53], GAE [43], and OCGNN [78]. Table 3
presents a comparison of the detection accuracy and efficiency of
OCR-APT using OCRGCN model versus general detectors.
Overall, OCRGCN consistently outperforms these detectors in
accuracy, as it captures edge types when aggregating node embeddings. In contrast, these detectors are designed for homogeneous
graphs and do not incorporate edge types. For example, OCGNN is a
one-class classification method similar to OCRGCN, but it does not
capture edge types. As a result, OCGNN suffers from low precision
and struggles to differentiate between normal and anomalous nodes.
CoLA, a self-supervised learning method for graph anomaly detection, achieves slightly higher precision than OCRGCN in the W10
host. However, its performance is inconsistent, with an F1-score of
approximately 0.4 in the other two hosts. Autoencoding-based methods, such as GAE, CONAD, and AnomalyDAE, exhibit inconsistent
detection accuracy. Notably, both CONAD and AnomalyDAE failed
to detect any anomalous nodes in the WS12 host. Besides, these

OCR-APT: Reconstructing APT Stories from Audit Logs using Subgraph
Anomaly Detection and LLMs

Table 3: Evaluating APT detection accuracy and efficiency of
OCR-APT on the Simulated NODLINK dataset using various
GNN-based anomaly detection models. OCRGCN is our novel
GNN-based model.
Host

Ubuntu

WS12

W10

Model

Precision

Recall

F1-Score

Detection
Time (s)

Occupied
Memory (GB)

AnomalyDAE
CONAD
GAE
CoLA
OCGNN
OCRGCN
AnomalyDAE
CONAD
GAE
CoLA
OCGNN
OCRGCN
AnomalyDAE
CONAD
GAE
CoLA
OCGNN
OCRGCN

0.24
0.34
1.00
0.32
0.04
0.95
0.00
0.00
0.26
0.30
0.32
0.74
0.82
0.82
0.70
0.98
0.75
0.95

0.61
1.00
0.94
0.59
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.93
0.47
0.98
0.93
0.99
0.99
1.00
0.99
1.00
0.99

0.34
0.51
0.97
0.40
0.07
0.97
0.00
0.00
0.40
0.37
0.48
0.82
0.90
0.90
0.83
0.99
0.86
0.97

1,411.67
1,431.23
928.60
182.33
941.84
828.01
111.16
124.34
115.13
31.80
108.39
30.87
266.69
264.55
159.69
41.43
173.54
59.21

53.88
53.93
46.27
13.58
31.43
41.78
8.26
9.03
7.47
7.80
7.80
10.82
63.69
59.45
7.26
7.59
7.69
10.48

methods are typically memory-intensive, as they scale quadratically
with the number of nodes due to the reconstruction of the complete
graph adjacency matrix [52].
7.4.2 OCR-APT System Components. We conducted ablation experiments to assess the impact of OCR-APT’s components. Four
variations of the system were created: the full system, one without
behavior-based features (Without B-Feat), one without type-specific
models (Without TS-Mod), and one without subgraph anomaly detection (Without SG-Det). Table 4 shows the detection accuracy and
efficiency of each variation.
The variation Without B-Feat relies on features from prior work,
THREATRACE [77], excluding statistics of the node idle phase
and normalization techniques. This variant failed to detect any
anomalous nodes in the WS12 host and reduced precision in the
other two hosts. These results align with our hypothesis that the
statistics of node idle periods assist in distinguishing benign nodes
from those associated with APT activity. Additionally, our behaviorbased features enhance time efficiency due to feature normalization.
The Without TS-Mod variant employs a single OCRGCN model
for all node types. While this approach improves time and memory
efficiency, it significantly compromises detection accuracy. In the
Ubuntu host, recall dropped from 100% to 44%, while precision in
the WS12 host declined sharply from 74% to 22%. These findings
indicate that the model struggles to learn the normal behavior
of different node types when relying on a single model. Training
multiple OCRGCN models—one per node type—assists in capturing
variations in benign behavior, as normal behavior patterns differ
across node types. We acknowledge that benign traffic may exhibit
multiple behavior patterns; therefore, exploring clustering-based
methods may offer a promising direction for future work.
In Table 4, the Without SG-Det variant performs only node-level
detection, avoiding the time overhead of subgraph construction
and detection. This variant reduces precision across all hosts, underscoring the value of our subgraph anomaly detection in filtering

Table 4: Comparison of APT Detection accuracy and efficiency of OCR-APT on Simulated NODLINK dataset with
all system components, and without the behavior-based features (B-Feat), the type-specific models (TS-Mod), and the
subgraph anomaly detection (SG-Det).
Host

Ubuntu

WS12

W10

Version

Precision

Recall

F1-Score

Detection
Time (s)

Occupied
Memory (GB)

Without B-Feat
Without TS-Mod
Without SG-Det
OCR-APT
Without B-Feat
Without TS-Mod
Without SG-Det
OCR-APT
Without B-Feat
Without TS-Mod
Without SG-Det
OCR-APT

0.41
1.00
0.58
0.95
0.00
0.22
0.32
0.74
0.89
0.80
0.80
0.95

1.00
0.44
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.93
1.00
0.93
0.99
0.99
1.00
0.99

0.58
0.62
0.73
0.97
0.00
0.36
0.48
0.82
0.94
0.89
0.89
0.97

1,380.69
24.01
34.89
828.01
57.02
12.37
22.58
30.87
134.26
78.74
20.28
59.21

52.83
18.97
19.61
41.78
10.65
10.47
10.82
10.82
10.30
10.10
10.48
10.48

false positives. The results show that subgraph detection improves
precision while maintaining high recall. OCR-APT’s subgraph construction reduces false positives by filtering out subgraphs with low
abnormality scores. Even if a node’s anomaly score is inaccurate,
it will not trigger an alert unless it belongs to a highly abnormal
subgraph. These findings highlight the importance of each core
component in enhancing OCR-APT’s effectiveness.
7.4.3 Hyperparameter Tuning. To optimize the F1-score, hyperparameter tuning was performed using Bash scripts to systematically
evaluate a range of parameter configurations. For GNN model training, this included variations in the number of RGCN layers {2, 3,
4}, graph embedding vector sizes {32, 64, 92}, and learning rates
{0.005, 0.001, 0.0005}. We also varied the 𝛽 parameter of the oneclass SVM in {0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7} and observed minimal impact on
performance; thus, we used PyGOD’s [51] default value (𝛽 = 0.5).
For subgraph construction, we considered parameters such as the
number of seed nodes {10, 15, 20} and the maximum edges per subgraph {5000, 10000}. We also evaluated the impact of using two-hop
expansion during subgraph construction. While two-hop expansion slightly reduces false negatives, it significantly increases false
positives. For example, in THEIA, false negatives reduced from 5
to 2, but false positives rose sharply from 0 to 21.5 K, reducing
precision from 1.0 to 0.5. Other datasets showed minimal impact
(see Appendix D for more results). Based on these experiments, we
adopt one-hop expansion as the default configuration for subgraph
construction. While the selected default parameters were applied
consistently across all hosts, future datasets with varying levels
of complexity may benefit from dataset-specific hyperparameter
tuning to ensure optimal performance.

7.5

Evaluation of Recovered Attack Reports

We evaluated the quality of our LLM-based attack investigator by
comparing our recovered attack reports to the ground truth reports provided by DARPA [17, 20]. Table 5 provides a summary
of the detected IOCs and APT stages across all reports. The APT
stages include Initial Compromise (IC), Internal Reconnaissance
(IR), Command and Control (C&C), Privilege Escalation (PE), Lateral
Movement (LM), Maintain Persistence (MP), Data Exfiltration (DE),

Ahmed Aly, Essam Mansour, and Amr Youssef

Table 5: Evaluation of recovered attack reports using both
commercial (GPT-4o-mini) and local (LLAMA3-8B) LLMs on
DARPA TC3 and OpTC datasets. The table shows the number
of detected IOCs and APT attack stages, with total counts in
parentheses. Detected stages are highlighted in green, while
missed stages are shown in red.
LLM

Dataset
DARPA
TC3

GPT-4o-mini
DARPA
OpTC
DARPA
TC3
LLAMA3-8B
DARPA
OpTC

Host
CADETS
TRACE
THEIA
201
501
51
CADETS
TRACE
THEIA
201
501
51

# Detected
IOCs
11 (16)
6 (7)
5 (7)
5 (6)
7 (11)
8 (10)
10 (16)
5 (7)
5 (7)
2 (6)
7 (11)
7 (10)

# Detected
APT Stages
5 (6)
4 (4)
5 (6)
5 (7)
5 (8)
4 (6)
5 (6)
4 (4)
5 (6)
3 (7)
5 (8)
4 (6)

Detected APT Stages
IC, MP, PE, C&C, IR, CT
IC, MP, C&C, IR
IC, MP, PE, C&C, IR, CT
IC, MP, PE, C&C, IR, LM , CT
IC, MP, PE, C&C, IR, LM, DE, CT
IC , MP, PE, C&C, IR, LM
IC, MP, PE, C&C, IR, CT
IC, MP, C&C, IR
IC, MP, PE, C&C, IR, CT
IC, MP, PE, C&C, IR, LM , CT
IC, MP, PE, C&C, IR, LM, DE, CT
IC , MP, PE, C&C, IR, LM

and Covering Tracks (CT). In most cases, our recovered reports covered the majority of APT stages (highlighted in green). They clearly
specify artifacts, such as command-and-control servers, malicious
executable files, and exploited processes involved in the attacks.
For example, reports recovered from the TRACE host captures all
performed attack stages, including initial compromise, persistence,
command and control, and internal reconnaissance. Simplified versions of the recovered reports8 are provided in Appendix C. Missed
stages (highlighted in red) in DARPA TC3 dataset primarily resulted from OS log parsing issues. This led to the missing of process
attributes on the CADETS host and file attributes on the THEIA
host.
For the DARPA OpTC dataset, the recovered reports captured
most APT stages but struggled to identify the lateral movement
and initial compromise phases. Detecting lateral movement was
beyond the scope of this work, as OCR-APT does not process network traffic logs. In future work, we plan to address this limitation
by integrating network traffic analysis with specialized detectors.
The initial compromise stage was challenging to detect because the
initial payload files remained inactive during the attack. As a result,
the anomaly detection models did not flag them as suspicious. However, further analysis revealed that these overlooked artifacts were
directly connected to detected IOCs. To mitigate missing IOCs, our
approach enriches reports with subgraphs surrounding key IOCs.
The LLM-based investigator explores these anomalous subgraphs
to uncover related artifacts missed by the detection model. For example, on the OpTC 51 host, it identified a malicious binary and a
C&C IP that had been initially overlooked. This enrichment helps
the LLM infer additional threats and improves overall detection.
Despite these limitations, the recovered reports provide clear and
detailed accounts of the attack scenarios. They align well with the
attack timestamps from the ground truth and reference most key artifacts. Moreover, the reports are written in a human-like narrative
style, similar to CTI reports.
To evaluate our system in a practical setting, we conducted experiments using locally deployed open-source LLMs. These models
preserve data privacy by eliminating the need to transmit sensitive
8 Full versions of the reports are available at https://github.com/CoDS-GCS/OCRAPT/tree/main/recovered_reports

Table 6: Detection accuracy of OCR-APT and FLASH on
DARPA TC3 without neighbor-based assumptions (original
metric results in brackets).
Dataset
CADETS
TRACE
THEIA

System
FLASH
OCR-APT
FLASH
OCR-APT
FLASH
OCR-APT

Precision
0.65 (0.93)
1.00 (1.00)
0.66 (0.95)
0.87 (1.00)
0.72 (0.92)
0.98 (1.00)

Recall
1.00 (1.00)
1.00 (1.00)
0.99 (0.99)
1.00 (1.00)
0.99 (1.00)
1.00 (1.00)

F1-Score
0.79 (0.96)
1.00 (1.00)
0.79 (0.97)
0.93 (1.00)
0.84 (0.96)
0.99 (1.00)

system logs to commercial providers, offering a cost-effective solution for long-term use. We ran the pipeline on a local machine with
4 CPU cores, an 8GB GPU, and 22GB of RAM. An ablation study
guided the selection of the most effective local LLM and embedding
model. We evaluated six local LLMs and seven embedding models.
The best setup—LLaMA3 (8B)[1] paired with IBM’s open-source
‘granite-embedding-125m-english’[26]—achieved comparable performance to ChatGPT. As shown in Table 5, this configuration
detected the same APT stages as ChatGPT on all hosts except
DARPA OpTC 501, where it missed two stages. While the quality of the comprehensive reports declined, the overall investigation
results remained reliable and informative. This strong performance
demonstrates the effectiveness of our pipeline, even when using
lightweight, locally deployed models. LLAMA3’s relatively small
size further suggests that OCR-APT’s performance is not driven by
memorization of benchmark datasets.
Furthermore, OCR-APT systematically validates generated reports against detected anomalies, ensuring that outputs are
grounded in actual data rather than relying on prior model
knowledge or LLM hallucinations. This is achieved by modularizing the investigation into subtasks, each guided by specialized Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompts. To assess the impact of this design, we compared it against a baseline that
uses a single CoT-based prompt to generate the entire attack
report, skipping intermediate steps like IOC extraction and
validation. The baseline produced fewer detected APT stages
and, more critically, frequent hallucinations—including fabricated entities like malicious.exe, suspicious_process.exe, and
vulnerable_service.exe, which were not present in the source
provenance graph. These results highlight the advantages of our
modular pipeline and its integrated validation mechanism.
Our OCR-APT automatically analyzes audit logs and generates
valuable insights in the form of human-like security reports. These
reports cover most APT stages and include key IOCs. Hence, they
provide a clear overview of the attack progression and highlight
critical indicators. These reports save security analysts significant
time and enable them to quickly identify key patterns. This leads
to more focused and efficient investigations.

7.6

Discussion and Limitations

7.6.1 Evaluation Metric. We follow the evaluation setup used in
prior work [16, 40, 70, 77], which treats neighboring nodes of compromised ones as part of the attack. Although this assumption may
not always hold [16], it ensures consistency with existing system

OCR-APT: Reconstructing APT Stories from Audit Logs using Subgraph
Anomaly Detection and LLMs

evaluations. To further assess OCR-APT, we conducted additional
experiments using a stricter metric that considers only directly
identified malicious nodes as true positives, without relying on
neighbor-based assumptions. Table 6 presents the detection results
of OCR-APT and FLASH (using FLASH’s official implementation)
under this setting. The results show that OCR-APT maintains high
precision and recall, with only minor precision drops in some cases.
In contrast, FLASH exhibits a significant decline in precision. For
instance, on the CADETS host, FLASH’s precision dropped from
0.93 to 0.65, while OCR-APT remained stable. On TRACE, FLASH
fell from 0.95 to 0.66, whereas OCR-APT declined slightly to 0.87.
On THEIA, FLASH dropped from 0.92 to 0.72, while OCR-APT
maintained a high precision of 0.98. These results highlight OCRAPT’s reliability under stricter evaluation and its advantage over
existing baselines. A broader assessment of evaluation metrics is a
promising direction for future work toward establishing best practices in anomaly detection benchmarking. Though narrative clarity
remains challenging to quantify, OCR-APT’s structured reports
offer more interpretable outputs than prior methods, encouraging
future efforts to formalize this aspect.
7.6.2 Multiple Attack Handling. One limitation of our approach
lies in the subgraph construction process, which may inadvertently
merge multiple attacks into a single subgraph when they share
system entities (e.g., processes). While this can be useful for capturing shared infrastructure or correlated activity, it may also obscure the boundaries between causally unrelated attacks, potentially confusing the investigation reports. Although our system can
manage causally disconnected attacks to some extent, accurately
distinguishing them within a shared subgraph remains challenging.
Future work could address this by segmenting subgraphs based
on behavioral signatures or by enhancing the LLM investigation
module to better identify boundaries between separate attacks.
7.6.3 Model Generalization. The model’s ability to generalize is
influenced by the extent to which benign behavior is represented
in the training data—a known limitation of anomaly detection. Our
approach mitigates this by incorporating structural and behavioral
features that support generalization, as reflected in the consistently
high precision observed across different hosts. However, unseen
benign patterns can still lead to false positives. To address this,
future work could investigate model adaptation strategies that
incorporate analyst feedback through semi-supervised learning.

8

Related Work

Recent research on provenance-based APT detection [90] can be categorized into two main approaches: heuristic-based and anomalybased methods [39]. In Section 2, we discussed the limitations of
anomaly detection systems. This section complements the discussion on related work by focusing on heuristic techniques and the
emerging role of LLMs in cybersecurity, highlighting how OCRAPT differs from existing work.
LLMs in Cybersecurity. LLMs have been applied across diverse
cybersecurity tasks, including software vulnerability detection [48,
55, 73], fuzzing [62], automated patching [44, 67], threat detection
(e.g., DDoS and phishing) [27, 45, 47], penetration testing [21], and
malware reverse engineering [35]. In threat intelligence, LLMs help

extract knowledge graphs from CTI reports [15, 24, 88], with benchmarks like AttackSeqBench [85] assessing LLM effectiveness. The
potential of LLMs for anomaly detection has been explored in a
recent survey [14]. In contrast, OCR-APT uniquely applies LLMs to
reconstruct APT stories from anomalous subgraph alerts. By combining subgraph-level anomaly detection with LLM-driven tasks,
such as IOC extraction, stage identification, and report generation,
OCR-APT produces interpretable and context-rich reports.
Heuristic-based Detection. These systems identify malicious behavior through rules, graph matching, or supervised learning on
known attacks. Rule-based approaches [30, 33, 34, 59] rely on expertdefined specifications derived from TTPs, but they are prone to
high false positives or miss zero-day threats [77]. CAPTAIN [75]
improves this by tuning rules with benign data. Graph matching
systems [4, 5, 58] compare suspicious subgraphs to predefined query
graphs derived from CTI reports. While automated graph construction is possible [58], these systems struggle with novel behaviors not
covered in the queries. Similarly, supervised models [13, 82] trained
on labeled datasets are limited by the scarcity and cost of real APT
data. APT-KGL [13] augments training data by mining TTPs and
CTI reports but still lacks generalization to unseen threats. Though
some systems incorporate Relational GCNs (RGCNs) [5, 13], they
typically focus on rule-based or supervised learning paradigms. In
contrast, OCR-APT adopts a fully anomaly-based approach, detecting deviations from normal behavior at a fine-grained subgraph
level—enabling identification of both known and unknown APTs.
In summary, OCR-APT’s core innovation lies in integrating
subgraph-level anomaly detection with LLM-based attack reconstruction. This approach avoids reliance on static rules or labeled
attack data, offering greater adaptability to emerging threats. By
converting anomaly alerts into detailed, human-readable reports,
OCR-APT enhances both detection and interpretability. This makes
OCR-APT a robust and versatile solution for APT defense.

9

Conclusion

We proposed OCR-APT, a system that automatically detects APTs
and recovers attack reports from provenance graphs. We developed
OCR-APT based on our novel GNN-based subgraph anomaly detection and LLM-based investigation. Hence, OCR-APT overcomes
the limitations of existing systems. The LLM-based attack investigator generates concise and human-like reports that help analysts
efficiently assess and prioritize threats. Comprehensive evaluations
on the DARPA TC3, OpTC, and NODLINK datasets show that OCRAPT consistently outperforms state-of-the-art subgraph anomaly
detection systems in detection accuracy. It also enhances the interpretability of results. Additionally, the ablation study demonstrates
that OCR-APT effectively balances detection accuracy with memory and time efficiency. By integrating GNN-based detection with
LLM-guided interpretation, OCR-APT significantly advances APT
detection and streamlines alert verification, bridging the gap between low-level telemetry and high-level analyst insight.

Acknowledgments
This research is funded by NSERC-CSE Research Communities
Grant. Researchers funded through the NSERC-CSE Research Communities Grants do not represent the Communications Security

Ahmed Aly, Essam Mansour, and Amr Youssef

Establishment Canada or the Government of Canada. Any research,
opinions or positions they produce as part of this initiative do not
represent the official views of the Government of Canada.

References
[1] AI@Meta. 2024. Llama 3 Model Card. (2024). https://github.com/meta-llama/
llama3/blob/main/MODEL_CARD.md
[2] Abdulellah Alsaheel, Yuhong Nan, Shiqing Ma, Le Yu, Gregory Walkup, Z Berkay
Celik, Xiangyu Zhang, and Dongyan Xu. 2021. ATLAS: A Sequence-based
Learning Approach for Attack Investigation. In USENIX Security Symposium.
[3] Adel Alshamrani, Sowmya Myneni, Ankur Chowdhary, and Dijiang Huang. 2019.
A survey on advanced persistent threats: Techniques, solutions, challenges, and
research opportunities. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 21, 2 (2019),
1851–1877.
[4] Enes Altinisik, Fatih Deniz, and Hüsrev Taha Sencar. 2023. Provg-searcher: a
graph representation learning approach for efficient provenance graph search. In
Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications
security. 2247–2261.
[5] Ahmed Aly, Shahrear Iqbal, Amr Youssef, and Essam Mansour. 2024. MEGRAPT: A Memory-Efficient APT Hunting System Based on Attack Representation
Learning. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 19 (2024),
5257–5271.
[6] Md Monowar Anjum, Shahrear Iqbal, and Benoit Hamelin. 2021. Analyzing the
usefulness of the DARPA OpTC dataset in cyber threat detection research. In
Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies.
27–32.
[7] Pieter Swart Aric Hagberg, Dan Schult. 2024. NetworkX: Network Analysis in
Python. https://github.com/networkx/networkx Accessed: 2025-03-06.
[8] Daniel Arp, Erwin Quiring, Feargus Pendlebury, Alexander Warnecke, Fabio
Pierazzi, Christian Wressnegger, Lorenzo Cavallaro, and Konrad Rieck. 2022.
Dos and don’ts of machine learning in computer security. In USENIX Security
Symposium.
[9] Bibek Bhattarai and Howie Huang. 2022. SteinerLog: Prize Collecting the Audit
Logs for Threat Hunting on Enterprise Network. In Proceedings of the ACM on
Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 97–108.
[10] Vincent D Blondel, Jean-Loup Guillaume, Renaud Lambiotte, and Etienne Lefebvre. 2008. Fast unfolding of communities in large networks. Journal of statistical
mechanics: theory and experiment 2008, 10 (2008), P10008.
[11] Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. 2017.
Enriching word vectors with subword information. Transactions of the association
for computational linguistics 5 (2017), 135–146.
[12] Abdenour Bounsiar and Michael G Madden. 2014. One-class support vector machines revisited. In International Conference on Information Science & Applications
(ICISA). IEEE, 1–4.
[13] Tieming Chen, Chengyu Dong, Mingqi Lv, Qijie Song, Haiwen Liu, Tiantian Zhu,
Kang Xu, Ling Chen, Shouling Ji, and Yuan Fan. 2022. APT-KGL: An Intelligent apt
Detection System Based on Threat Knowledge and Heterogeneous Provenance
Graph Learning. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing (2022).
[14] Wenrui Cheng, Tiantian Zhu, Chunlin Xiong, Haofei Sun, Zijun Wang, Shunan
Jing, Mingqi Lv, and Yan Chen. 2025. SoK: Knowledge is All You Need: Last
Mile Delivery for Automated Provenance-based Intrusion Detection with LLMs.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.03108 (2025).
[15] Yutong Cheng, Osama Bajaber, Saimon Amanuel Tsegai, Dawn Song, and Peng
Gao. 2024. CTINEXUS: Leveraging Optimized LLM In-Context Learning for
Constructing Cybersecurity Knowledge Graphs Under Data Scarcity. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.21060 (2024).
[16] Zijun Cheng, Qiujian Lv, Jinyuan Liang, Yan Wang, Degang Sun, Thomas
Pasquier, and Xueyuan Han. 2024. Kairos: Practical intrusion detection and
investigation using whole-system provenance. In 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 3533–3551.
[17] DARPA. 2018. TC3 Ground Truth Report. https://drive.google.com/file/d/
1mrs4LWkGk-3zA7t7v8zrhm0yEDHe57QU/view Accessed: 2025-03-06.
[18] DARPA. 2018.
Transparent Computing Engagement 3 (TC3) Data Release.
https://github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-Computing/blob/master/
README-E3.md Accessed: 2025-03-06.
[19] DARPA. 2020. Operationally Transparent Cyber (OpTC) Data Release. https:
//github.com/FiveDirections/OpTC-data Accessed: 2025-03-06.
[20] DARPA. 2020. OpTC Ground Truth Report. https://drive.google.com/file/d/
1lX8kfrdZGJwaqSdwTlEBGwmz069lZWh-/view Accessed: 2025-03-06.
[21] Gelei Deng, Yi Liu, Víctor Mayoral-Vilches, Peng Liu, Yuekang Li, Yuan Xu,
Tianwei Zhang, Yang Liu, Martin Pinzger, and Stefan Rass. 2024. PentestGPT:
Evaluating and Harnessing Large Language Models for Automated Penetration
Testing. In USENIX Security Symposium. 847–864.
[22] Haoyi Fan, Fengbin Zhang, and Zuoyong Li. 2020. Anomalydae: Dual autoencoder for anomaly detection on attributed networks. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 5685–5689.

[23] Pengcheng Fang, Peng Gao, Changlin Liu, Erman Ayday, Kangkook Jee, Ting
Wang, Yanfang Fanny Ye, Zhuotao Liu, and Xusheng Xiao. 2022. BackPropagating System Dependency Impact for Attack Investigation. In USENIX
Security Symposium. 2461–2478.
[24] Romy Fieblinger, Md Tanvirul Alam, and Nidhi Rastogi. 2024. Actionable cyber
threat intelligence using knowledge graphs and large language models. In 2024
IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW). IEEE,
100–111.
[25] Akul Goyal, Xueyuan Han, Gang Wang, and Adam Bates. 2023. Sometimes,
you aren’t what you do: Mimicry attacks against provenance graph host intrusion detection systems. In Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS)
Symposium.
[26] IBM Granite Embedding Team. 2024. Granite Embedding Models. https://github.
com/ibm-granite/granite-embedding-models/
[27] Michael Guastalla, Yiyi Li, Arvin Hekmati, and Bhaskar Krishnamachari. 2023.
Application of large language models to ddos attack detection. In International
Conference on Security and Privacy in Cyber-Physical Systems and Smart Vehicles.
Springer, 83–99.
[28] Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. 2017. Inductive representation
learning on large graphs. Advances in neural information processing systems 30
(2017).
[29] Xueyuan Han, Thomas Pasquier, Adam Bates, James Mickens, and Margo Seltzer.
2020. UNICORN: Runtime Provenance-Based Detector for Advanced Persistent
Threats. In Network and Distributed Systems Security (NDSS) Symposium.
[30] Wajih Ul Hassan, Adam Bates, and Daniel Marino. 2020. Tactical provenance
analysis for endpoint detection and response systems. In IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 1172–1189.
[31] Wajih Ul Hassan, Shengjian Guo, Ding Li, Zhengzhang Chen, Kangkook Jee,
Zhichun Li, and Adam Bates. 2019. Nodoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with
automated provenance triage. In Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS)
Symposium.
[32] Wajih Ul Hassan, Ding Li, Kangkook Jee, Xiao Yu, Kexuan Zou, Dawei Wang,
Zhengzhang Chen, Zhichun Li, Junghwan Rhee, Jiaping Gui, et al. 2020. This is
why we can’t cache nice things: Lightning-fast threat hunting using suspicionbased hierarchical storage. In Annual Computer Security Applications Conference.
165–178.
[33] Md Nahid Hossain, Sadegh M Milajerdi, Junao Wang, Birhanu Eshete, Rigel
Gjomemo, R Sekar, Scott Stoller, and VN Venkatakrishnan. 2017. SLEUTH: Realtime attack scenario reconstruction from COTS audit data. In USENIX Security
Symposium. 487–504.
[34] Md Nahid Hossain, Sanaz Sheikhi, and R Sekar. 2020. Combating dependence
explosion in forensic analysis using alternative tag propagation semantics. In
2020 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP). IEEE, 1139–1155.
[35] Peiwei Hu, Ruigang Liang, and Kai Chen. 2024. Degpt: Optimizing decompiler
output with llm. In Proceedings 2024 Network and Distributed System Security
Symposium, Vol. 267622140.
[36] Zeqi Huang, Yonghao Gu, and Qing Zhao. 2022. One-Class Directed Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network for Intrusion Detection. In The International
Conference on Innovation in Artificial Intelligence (ICIAI). 178–184.
[37] Frank K Hwang and Dana S Richards. 1992. Steiner tree problems. Networks 22,
1 (1992), 55–89.
[38] Makoto Imase and Bernard M Waxman. 1991. Dynamic Steiner tree problem.
SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics 4, 3 (1991), 369–384.
[39] Muhammad Adil Inam, Yinfang Chen, Akul Goyal, Jason Liu, Jaron Mink, Noor
Michael, Sneha Gaur, Adam Bates, and Wajih Ul Hassan. 2022. SoK: History is a
Vast Early Warning System: Auditing the Provenance of System Intrusions. In
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE Computer Society, 307–325.
[40] Zian Jia, Yun Xiong, Yuhong Nan, Yao Zhang, Jinjing Zhao, and Mi Wen. 2024.
MAGIC: Detecting Advanced Persistent Threats via Masked Graph Representation Learning. In USENIX Security Symposium. 5197–5214.
[41] Maya Kapoor, Joshua Melton, Michael Ridenhour, Siddharth Krishnan, and
Thomas Moyer. 2021. PROV-GEM: Automated Provenance Analysis Framework using Graph Embeddings. In IEEE International Conference on Machine
Learning and Applications (ICMLA). IEEE, 1720–1727.
[42] Hwan Kim, Byung Suk Lee, Won-Yong Shin, and Sungsu Lim. 2022. Graph
anomaly detection with graph neural networks: Current status and challenges.
IEEE Access (2022).
[43] Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. 2016. Variational graph auto-encoders. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.07308 (2016).
[44] Ummay Kulsum, Haotian Zhu, Bowen Xu, and Marcelo d’Amorim. 2024. A case
study of llm for automated vulnerability repair: Assessing impact of reasoning
and patch validation feedback. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference
on AI-Powered Software. 103–111.
[45] Qingyang Li, Yihang Zhang, Zhidong Jia, Yannan Hu, Lei Zhang, Jianrong Zhang,
Yongming Xu, Yong Cui, Zongming Guo, and Xinggong Zhang. 2024. DoLLM:
How Large Language Models Understanding Network Flow Data to Detect
Carpet Bombing DDoS. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07638 (2024).

OCR-APT: Reconstructing APT Stories from Audit Logs using Subgraph
Anomaly Detection and LLMs
[46] Shaofei Li, Feng Dong, Xusheng Xiao, Haoyu Wang, Fei Shao, Jiedong Chen,
Yao Guo, Xiangqun Chen, and Ding Li. 2024. NODLINK: An Online System for
Fine-Grained apt Attack Detection and Investigation. In Network and Distributed
System Security (NDSS) Symposium.
[47] Yuexin Li, Chengyu Huang, Shumin Deng, Mei Lin Lock, Tri Cao, Nay Oo,
Hoon Wei Lim, and Bryan Hooi. 2024. KnowPhish: Large Language Models
Meet Multimodal Knowledge Graphs for Enhancing Reference-Based Phishing
Detection. In 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24). 793–810.
[48] Jie Lin and David Mohaisen. 2025. From Large to Mammoth: A Comparative
Evaluation of Large Language Models in Vulnerability Detection. In Network
and Distributed System Security (NDSS) Symposium.
[49] Fucheng Liu, Yu Wen, Dongxue Zhang, Xihe Jiang, Xinyu Xing, and Dan Meng.
2019. Log2vec: A heterogeneous graph embedding based approach for detecting
cyber threats within enterprise. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC conference on
computer and communications security. 1777–1794.
[50] Jerry Liu. 2022. LlamaIndex. https://github.com/jerryjliu/llama_index
[51] Kay Liu, Yingtong Dou, Xueying Ding, Xiyang Hu, Ruitong Zhang, Hao Peng,
Lichao Sun, and S Yu Philip. 2024. Pygod: A python library for graph outlier
detection. Journal of Machine Learning Research 25, 141 (2024), 1–9.
[52] Kay Liu, Yingtong Dou, Yue Zhao, Xueying Ding, Xiyang Hu, Ruitong Zhang,
Kaize Ding, Canyu Chen, Hao Peng, Kai Shu, et al. 2022. Bond: Benchmarking
unsupervised outlier node detection on static attributed graphs. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), 27021–27035.
[53] Yixin Liu, Zhao Li, Shirui Pan, Chen Gong, Chuan Zhou, and George Karypis.
2021. Anomaly detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised
learning. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems 33, 6 (2021),
2378–2392.
[54] Yushan Liu, Xiaokui Shu, Yixin Sun, Jiyong Jang, and Prateek Mittal. 2022. RAPID:
real-time alert investigation with context-aware prioritization for efficient threat
discovery. In Proceedings of the Annual Computer Security Applications Conference.
827–840.
[55] Guilong Lu, Xiaolin Ju, Xiang Chen, Wenlong Pei, and Zhilong Cai. 2024. GRACE:
Empowering LLM-based software vulnerability detection with graph structure
and in-context learning. Journal of Systems and Software 212 (2024), 112031.
[56] Yang Lv, Shaona Qin, Zifeng Zhu, Zhuocheng Yu, Shudong Li, and Weihong Han.
2022. A Review of Provenance Graph based apt Attack Detection: Applications
and Developments. In IEEE International Conference on Data Science in Cyberspace
(DSC). IEEE, 498–505.
[57] Emaad Manzoor, Sadegh M Milajerdi, and Leman Akoglu. 2016. Fast memoryefficient anomaly detection in streaming heterogeneous graphs. In Proceedings
of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining. 1035–1044.
[58] Sadegh M Milajerdi, Birhanu Eshete, Rigel Gjomemo, and VN Venkatakrishnan.
2019. Poirot: Aligning attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber
threat hunting. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security. 1795–1812.
[59] Sadegh M Milajerdi, Rigel Gjomemo, Birhanu Eshete, Ramachandran Sekar, and
VN Venkatakrishnan. 2019. Holmes: real-time apt detection through correlation
of suspicious information flows. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP).
IEEE, 1137–1152.
[60] Kunal Mukherjee, Joshua Wiedemeier, Tianhao Wang, James Wei, Feng Chen,
Muhyun Kim, Murat Kantarcioglu, and Kangkook Jee. 2023. Evading ProvenanceBasedML detectors with adversarial system actions. In 32nd USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 23). 1199–1216.
[61] Gireen Naidu, Tranos Zuva, and Elias Mmbongeni Sibanda. 2023. A Review of
Evaluation Metrics in Machine Learning Algorithms. In Computer Science On-line
Conference. Springer, 15–25.
[62] Yaroslav Oliinyk, Michael Scott, Ryan Tsang, Chongzhou Fang, Houman Homayoun, et al. 2024. Fuzzing BusyBox: Leveraging LLM and Crash Reuse for Embedded Bug Unearthing. In 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24).
883–900.
[63] Ontotext. 2025. GraphDB. https://www.ontotext.com/products/graphdb/ Accessed: 2025-03-06.
[64] OpenAI. 2024. GPT-4o-mini. https://openai.com/index/gpt-4o-mini-advancingcost-efficient-intelligence/. Accessed April 2025.
[65] OpenAI. 2024. text-embedding-3-large. https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/
embeddings/embedding-models. Accessed April 2025.
[66] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, and
et al. 2019. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning
Library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates,
Inc.
[67] Hammond Pearce, Benjamin Tan, Baleegh Ahmad, Ramesh Karri, and Brendan
Dolan-Gavitt. 2023. Examining zero-shot vulnerability repair with large language
models. In 2023 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 2339–2356.
[68] Kexin Pei, Zhongshu Gu, Brendan Saltaformaggio, Shiqing Ma, Fei Wang, Zhiwei
Zhang, Luo Si, Xiangyu Zhang, and Dongyan Xu. 2016. Hercule: Attack story
reconstruction via community discovery on correlated log graph. In Proceedings
of the Annual Conference on Computer Security Applications. 583–595.

[69] Gabrijela Perković, Antun Drobnjak, and Ivica Botički. 2024. Hallucinations in
llms: Understanding and addressing challenges. In MIPRO ICT and Electronics
Convention (MIPRO). IEEE, 2084–2088.
[70] Mati Ur Rehman, Hadi Ahmadi, and Wajih Ul Hassan. 2024. Flash: A comprehensive approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation
learning. In 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 3552–3570.
[71] David Wood Richard Cyganiak and Markus Lanthaler. 2014. RDF 1.1 concepts
and abstract syntax. (2014).
[72] Michael Schlichtkrull, Thomas N Kipf, Peter Bloem, Rianne van den Berg, Ivan
Titov, and Max Welling. 2018. Modeling relational data with graph convolutional
networks. In European semantic web conference. Springer.
[73] Saad Ullah, Mingji Han, Saurabh Pujar, Hammond Pearce, Ayse Coskun, and
Gianluca Stringhini. 2024. Llms cannot reliably identify and reason about security
vulnerabilities (yet?): A comprehensive evaluation, framework, and benchmarks.
In 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 862–880.
[74] Thijs Van Ede, Hojjat Aghakhani, Noah Spahn, Riccardo Bortolameotti, Marco
Cova, Andrea Continella, Maarten van Steen, Andreas Peter, Christopher Kruegel,
and Giovanni Vigna. 2022. Deepcase: Semi-supervised contextual analysis of
security events. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 522–539.
[75] Lingzhi Wang, Xiangmin Shen, Weijian Li, Zhenyuan Li, R Sekar, Han Liu, and
Yan Chen. 2025. Incorporating gradients to rules: Towards lightweight, adaptive
provenance-based intrusion detection. In Network and Distributed System Security
(NDSS) Symposium.
[76] Qi Wang, Wajih Ul Hassan, Ding Li, Kangkook Jee, Xiao Yu, Kexuan Zou, Junghwan Rhee, Zhengzhang Chen, Wei Cheng, Carl A Gunter, et al. 2020. You Are
What You Do: Hunting Stealthy Malware via Data Provenance Analysis. In
Network and Distributed Systems Security (NDSS) Symposium.
[77] Su Wang, Zhiliang Wang, Tao Zhou, Hongbin Sun, Xia Yin, Dongqi Han, Han
Zhang, Xingang Shi, and Jiahai Yang. 2022. Threatrace: Detecting and tracing
host-based threats in node level through provenance graph learning. IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 17 (2022), 3972–3987.
[78] Xuhong Wang, Baihong Jin, Ying Du, Ping Cui, Yingshui Tan, and Yupu Yang.
2021. One-class graph neural networks for anomaly detection in attributed
networks. Neural computing and applications 33 (2021), 12073–12085.
[79] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei
Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-Thought Prompting
Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS). https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
hash/9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Abstract-Conference.html
[80] Zhiqiang Xu, Pengcheng Fang, Changlin Liu, Xusheng Xiao, Yu Wen, and Dan
Meng. 2022. Depcomm: Graph summarization on system audit logs for attack
investigation. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 540–557.
[81] Zhiming Xu, Xiao Huang, Yue Zhao, Yushun Dong, and Jundong Li. 2022. Contrastive attributed network anomaly detection with data augmentation. In PacificAsia conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. Springer, 444–457.
[82] Na Yan, Yu Wen, Luyao Chen, Yanna Wu, Boyang Zhang, Zhaoyang Wang, and
Dan Meng. 2022. Deepro: Provenance-based APT Campaigns Detection via GNN.
In IEEE International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and
Communications (TrustCom). IEEE, 747–758.
[83] Fan Yang, Jiacen Xu, Chunlin Xiong, Zhou Li, and Kehuan Zhang. 2023. PROGRAPHER: An Anomaly Detection System based on Provenance Graph Embedding.
In USENIX Security Symposium. 4355–4372.
[84] Li Yang and Abdallah Shami. 2020. On hyperparameter optimization of machine
learning algorithms: Theory and practice. Neurocomputing 415 (2020), 295–316.
[85] Javier Yong, Haokai Ma, Yunshan Ma, Anis Yusof, Zhenkai Liang, and Ee-Chien
Chang. 2025. AttackSeqBench: Benchmarking Large Language Models’ Understanding of Sequential Patterns in Cyber Attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.03170
(2025).
[86] Jun Zeng, Zheng Leong Chua, Yinfang Chen, Kaihang Ji, Zhenkai Liang, and Jian
Mao. 2021. WATSON: Abstracting Behaviors from Audit Logs via Aggregation
of Contextual Semantics.. In Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS)
Symposium.
[87] Jun Zengy, Xiang Wang, Jiahao Liu, Yinfang Chen, Zhenkai Liang, Tat-Seng
Chua, and Zheng Leong Chua. 2022. Shadewatcher: Recommendation-guided
cyber threat analysis using system audit records. In IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 489–506.
[88] Yongheng Zhang, Tingwen Du, Yunshan Ma, Xiang Wang, Yi Xie, Guozheng
Yang, Yuliang Lu, and Ee-Chien Chang. 2025. AttacKG+: Boosting attack graph
construction with Large Language Models. Computers & Security 150 (2025),
104220.
[89] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu,
Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. 2024. Judging
llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 36 (2024).
[90] Michael Zipperle, Florian Gottwalt, Elizabeth Chang, and Tharam Dillon. 2022.
Provenance-based Intrusion Detection Systems: A Survey. ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR) (2022).

Ahmed Aly, Essam Mansour, and Amr Youssef

Network Flow

UNIX
Socket

Connect, Accept, Close,
RecvFrom, RecvMsg, SendTo,
SendMsg, Read, Write

Process

Accept, Close, Connect,
Create_Object, Execute,
Read, RecvFrom, RecvMsg,
SendMsg, SendTo, Write,
Bind, Other
Close, Create Object,
Execute, FCNTL,
Flows_To, Read, Write

Unnamed
Pipe

Create_Object, Open,
Close, Unlink
Modify_Process

DIR

Change_Principal,
Fork, Signal, Exit
Modify_Process

Open, Read, Write, Close,
Rename, Unlink, Execute
Modeify_File_Attribute, FCNTL,
Truncate, Flows_To, Link,
LSeek, Mmap, Modify_Process

File

Figure 5: Schema of provenance graphs for the CADETS host.

A

Retrieve IOCs Prompt: The provided document contains log
events related to anomaly detection alerts. Extract the list of
IOCs from the document 𝐴𝑆𝐺𝑑𝑜𝑐 . Return the output only as a
Python list, formatted as: [‘IOC1’, ‘IOC2’, ‘IOC3’, etc].
The LLM then uses the IOC list to summarize the serialized
subgraph into a structured attack report.

Provenance Graphs Schema

Figure 5 presents the schema of the provenance graph for the
CADETS host, illustrating system entities and the events connecting
them. The schema includes a diverse range of system entities such
as processes, files, and network flows. The relationships between
these entities include actions such as ‘read’, ‘write’, and ‘execute’,
as well as network communications like ‘send’ and ‘receive’.

B

The investigation workflow is broken down into a sequence of
subtasks, each guided by a specialized prompt. For each anomalous
subgraph, the LLM is first prompted to extract a list of relevant
IOCs, returned in Python list format.

LLM Prompts

In this section, we present the prompts and instructions used by
our LLM-based attack investigation module. The system begins
by configuring the LLM as an APT investigator, responsible for
producing factual and well-structured attack reports.
Investigator Instructions: You are an advanced persistent
threat (APT) attack investigator, skilled at summarizing log
events related to anomaly detection alerts into comprehensive
attack reports. You possess deep expertise in APTs, Cyber Threat
Intelligence (CTI), and operating system security.
Guidelines: Focus on delivering factual, high-quality analysis
in a human-like narrative. Ensure all information is accurate
and directly sourced from the document. Do not introduce any
details not present in the document, avoiding any fabrications
or hallucinations. Keep a detailed account of the attack’s execution, including specific timestamps. All responses should be
formatted in Markdown.
Definitions: The APT stages are: Initial Compromise, Internal
Reconnaissance, Command and Control, Privilege Escalation,
Lateral Movement, Maintain Persistence, Data Exfiltration, and
Covering Tracks. Indicators of Compromise (IOCs) include: External IP addresses. Suspicious or executable files suspected to
be potential threats. Processes with moderate to high likelihood
of exploitation.
Your task is to generate an attack report that includes the following sections: A concise summary of the attack behavior, detailing
key events and actions taken during the incident. Where applicable, specify the corresponding stage of the APT attack. A table
of IOCs detected in the document. Based on your cybersecurity
expertise, add a concise security context beside each detected
IOC, including the legitimate usage and exploitation likelihood.
A list of chronological log of actions, organized by minute.

Summarize Report Prompt: Based on the logs in document
𝐴𝑆𝐺𝑑𝑜𝑐 and the extracted IOCs list: [𝐼𝑂𝐶 lst ]. Summarize the
𝐴𝑆𝐺𝑑𝑜𝑐 document into an attack report.
The attack report includes the following sections: A concise
summary of the attack behavior, detailing key events and actions taken during the incident. Where applicable, specify the
corresponding stage of the APT attack. A table of IOCs detected
in the document. Based on your cybersecurity expertise, add a
concise security context beside each detected IOC, including the
legitimate usage and exploitation likelihood. A list of chronological log of actions, organized by minute.
After that, the system prompts the LLM to extract the top IOCs
associated with each APT stage from attack reports.

Retrieve IOCs per APT stage Prompt: The provided reports
names are: [𝑅atk ]. Extract the three highest-priority IOCs related
to the stage: 𝑠𝑡𝑔 from each provided reports. Focus on external
IP addresses, suspicious or executable files, malicious processes,
and exploitable processes. Return the output only as a Python
list, formatted as: [‘IOC1’, ‘IOC2’, ‘IOC3’, etc].
The LLM then compiles all attack reports and IOCs into a comprehensive attack report.

Summarize Comprehensive Report Prompt: Based on the
provided reports and the extracted IOCs list: [𝐼𝑂𝐶 lst ]. Summarize all provided reports into a comprehensive attack report.
Consider all external IP addresses, suspicious or executable files,
malicious processes, and exploitable processes referenced in the
provided reports.
Next, the system initializes a second LLM as a judge, with a
role-specific instruction set for a security analyst, who prioritizes
IOCs for deeper inspection.

OCR-APT: Reconstructing APT Stories from Audit Logs using Subgraph
Anomaly Detection and LLMs

Analyst Judge Instructions: You are a highly skilled security
analyst specializing in Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs), Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI), and operating system security.
Your expertise includes reviewing attack reports and providing
actionable insights.
The APT attack stages are: Initial Compromise, Internal Reconnaissance, Command and Control, Privilege Escalation, Lateral
Movement, Maintain Persistence, Data Exfiltration, and Covering Tracks.
Your task is to analyze the provided attack report and identify
key Indicators of Compromise (IOCs) for further investigation.
IOCs include external IP addresses, processes with moderate
to high exploitation likelihood, and associated suspected files.
Focus on identifying IOCs whose contextual analysis could uncover additional APT attack stages, enabling a comprehensive
understanding of the full attack scenario. Prioritize IOCs directly
tied to malicious activity, such as command-and-control IPs or
malicious executable binaries, while deprioritizing general system processes or indicators linked to benign activities.

Summary of Attack Behavior
The analysis of the provided reports indicates a coordinated Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) attack characterized by multiple
stages, including Initial Compromise, Internal Reconnaissance, Command and Control, Lateral Movement, Maintain Persistence, and
Data Exfiltration. The attack involved a series of suspicious activities primarily centered around the execution of the process tcexec ,
which facilitated various malicious actions.

Key Events:
Initial Compromise: The execution of the tcexec process marked the beginning of the attack. This process was responsible for
memory allocation, library loading, and file writing operations, indicating potential exploitation of system vulnerabilities. The logs
show the loading of critical libraries such as ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 , libc.so.6 , and libpthread.so.0 , which are essential for
executing processes on Linux systems. This could indicate an attempt to exploit vulnerabilities in these libraries. The first instance
of loading the library ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 occurred on 2018-04-13 at 13:59 by Thunderbird, indicating a potential entry point
of the attack.
Command and Control: The attacker established connections to several external IP addresses, including 128.55.12.55 ,
128.55.12.67 , 128.55.12.73 , and 162.66.239.75 . These connections suggest attempts to communicate with command and

control servers, which are often used to issue commands to compromised systems. Notably, the logs for 128.55.12.55 indicate
a pattern of connection and disconnection, characteristic of C2 activity. The consistent communication with the IP address
162.66.239.75 through multiple SENDMSG and RECVMSG actions suggests that this IP is being used for C2 purposes.

Internal Reconnaissance: The logs show multiple connection attempts to various IP addresses, indicating the attacker's efforts
to explore the network and identify additional targets for exploitation. The logs reveal multiple connections to various internal IP
addresses, indicating an exploration of the network environment, which is typical during the reconnaissance phase of an APT.
Maintain Persistence: The logs from the context file indicate that the file tcexec underwent multiple operations, including
being closed, created, modified, renamed, and updated. These actions are indicative of an attacker establishing control over the
file, which may serve as a means to execute further malicious activities. The LOADLIBRARY operation involving tcexec suggests
that the file is being used to load additional libraries, potentially for executing malicious code or maintaining persistence. The
repeated loading of the library ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 by various applications, including Thunderbird and Python3, raises
concerns about potential exploitation.

Indicators of Compromise (IoCs)
The following external IP addresses and suspicious files were identified as potential indicators of compromise (IoCs) throughout the
reports:
IoC

Security Context

128.55.12.1

Potentially a command and control server; legitimate usage may include internal network services.

128.55.12.55

The judge LLM is prompted to select the highest-priority IOC in
the comprehensive report to guide further investigation.
Select IOC by LLM Judge Prompt: Review the attack report to
identify the highest-priority 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 type IOC for further investigation, that could aid in uncovering additional APT attack stages.
Return the IOC only, formatted as ‘IOC’.
The selected IOC is used to query historical context from the
graph database, which is summarized into additional reports. The
final step prompts the LLM to enrich the comprehensive report
using this additional context.

External IP address involved in multiple connections; high likelihood of exploitation, associated with C2
activity.

128.55.12.67

External IP address with multiple connection attempts; could be associated with malicious activity.

128.55.12.73

External IP address involved in data transfer; potential command and control server.

128.55.12.103

External IP address with connections; may indicate lateral movement or data exfiltration.

128.55.12.110

External IP address involved in connections; potential for exploitation.

128.55.12.141

External IP address with multiple connection attempts; could indicate malicious intent.

128.55.12.166

External IP address involved in connections; potential command and control server.

162.66.239.75

Known external IP address associated with C2 activities. High likelihood of exploitation.

tcexec
ld-linux-x8664.so.2

The file tcexec is likely a legitimate executable. However, its repeated modifications and library loading
suggest it may be exploited for malicious purposes, indicating a moderate to high likelihood of exploitation.
A critical system library; legitimate usage but can be exploited if compromised.

libc.so.6

Standard C library; essential for many applications. Exploitation can lead to privilege escalation.

libpthread.so.0

Library for multi-threading; legitimate but can be targeted for exploitation.

ld.so.cache

Cache for dynamic linker; legitimate usage but can be manipulated for malicious purposes.

Chronological Log of Actions
2018-04-13
13:59:Thunderbird LOADLIBRARY the file: ld-linux-x86-64.so.2
14:01: CREATE_OBJECT the file: tcexec / MODIFY_FILE_ATTRIBUTES the file: tcexec / RENAME the file: tcexec / UPDATE the file:
tcexec / CLOSE the file: tcexec

Enrich Comprehensive Report Prompt: Enrich the comprehensive attack report 𝑅comp by incorporating the summary of
the attack report 𝑅atk . Consider all external IP addresses, suspicious or executable files, malicious processes, and exploitable
processes referenced in the provided reports.

14:02: python3 LOADLIBRARY the file: ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 (2 times)
14:13: Thunderbird LOADLIBRARY the file: ld-linux-x86-64.so.
14:20: tcexec LOADLIBRARY the file: ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 / tcexec MMAP a memory (2 times) / tcexec LOADLIBRARY the file: tcexec
/ pine EXECUTE the process: tcexec / tcexec MPROTECT a memory / tcexec WRITE a fileChar
14:21: tcexec CONNECT the flow: 128.55.12.73 / tcexec WRITE a fileChar (2 times) / tcexec CLOSE the flow: 128.55.12.73 / tcexec
CONNECT the flow: 128.55.12.55 / tcexec CLOSE the flow: 128.55.12.55 / tcexec OPEN a fileDir / tcexec CONNECT the flow:
128.55.12.67 (2 times)
....... ..... .....
14:25: tcexec CLOSE the flow: 103.12.253.24
14:28: tcexec EXIT the process: tcexec

C

Recovered Attack Reports

The logs and identified IoCs suggest a sophisticated APT attack with multiple stages and indicators of compromise. Immediate action
is recommended to investigate the identified IP addresses and mitigate any potential threats to the network. Further analysis and
monitoring of the affected systems are essential to prevent future incidents.

In this section, we present simplified versions of recovered reports.
Figure 6 shows the comprehensive attack report recovered from
the TRACE host in DARPA TC3 dataset. The report details the initial
compromise stage, where the attacker leveraged IP 128.55.12.73
to deliver a malicious executable as an email attachment through
the thunderbird process. It identifies the executable file tcexec,
which was downloaded to disk, renamed, and had its attributes
modified to maintain persistence. Moreover, it captures the use of
the server 162.66.239.75 for command-and-control activities.
Figure 7 presents the attack report recovered from host ‘51’ in
the DARPA OpTC dataset, detailing the key stages of a malicious
upgrade attack. The attack involved the delivery of the malicious
payload ckfgw.exe through a compromised Notepad Plus upgrade
process. The recovered report accurately identified several key artifacts, including the malicious binary ckfgw.exe, the command

Figure 6: A simplified version of the comprehensive attack report recovered from the ‘TRACE’ host in DARPA TC3 dataset.

and control server 53.192.68.50, the shell script cmd.exe used to
execute commands, and the scanned IP address 142.20.56.52. It
also captured schtasks.exe, which was employed to establish persistence via scheduled tasks. Notably, all these artifacts, along with
their timestamps, align with the details provided in the ground truth
report. Additionally, the recovered report detected an additional
executable binary, biGuWCmNsuCIG.exe, written by cKfGW.exe but
not explicitly mentioned in the ground truth report.

Ahmed Aly, Essam Mansour, and Amr Youssef

Summary of Attack Behavior

Summary of Attack Behavior

The analysis of the provided reports indicates a coordinated attack involving multiple stages of an Advanced Persistent Threat (APT)

The analysis of the provided reports indicates a coordinated and sophisticated attack, likely an advanced persistent threat (APT), characterized
by multiple stages of exploitation and manipulation. The logs span various timestamps, primarily focusing on the activities of the svchost.exe

on September 25, 2019. The attack primarily utilized the python.exe , svchost.exe , and other processes to execute malicious

process, which is commonly exploited by attackers to execute malicious actions while masquerading as a legitimate system process.

activities, including data exfiltration, internal reconnaissance, and potential command and control communications. The presence of
various suspicious files and external IP addresses suggests a well-planned operation aimed at compromising sensitive information

Key Events and Stages Identified:

and maintaining persistence within the target environment.

Internal Reconnaissance:

Key Events:

The logs indicate multiple read and write operations on various files, including suspicious files such as 8d273d55-059f-4c89-9fd2587b4bad1ce4_S-1-5-21-4190936083-3304963419-1584388968-1105_35.rslc , setuptools-0.7.2-py2.7.egg , and kickoff.log ,

Internal Reconnaissance: The logs show extensive file reading activities, including multiple .pyc files and configuration files,

which may have been used to gather information about the system and its configurations. The use of NETSTAT.EXE and PING.EXE

indicating that the attacker was exploring the environment to identify potential targets and vulnerabilities. The use of commands

further suggests that the attacker was gathering information about the network and available hosts. The repeated access to

via cmd.exe , wmiprvse.exe , and other system processes suggests that the attacker was gathering information about the system

svchost.exe and its associated prefetch files ( SVCHOST.EXE-CA1952BB.pf , SVCHOST.EXE-2562231B.pf , and SVCHOST.EXE-

and its environment. The communication pattern between 142.20.56.52 and 53.192.68.50 further indicates ongoing

824A39CF.pf ) indicates an attempt to gather information about the system and its services.

reconnaissance activities. Additionally, the logs from the context_ckfgw document show repeated inbound messages from

Command and Control:

239.255.255.250 , suggesting that the attacker was gathering information about the network environment.

Repeated outbound messages to 202.6.172.98 , 142.20.57.246 , and other internal IP addresses highlight the establishment of a C2

Command and Control: Outbound connections were established to external IP addresses, notably 142.20.61.132 , 10.20.2.66 ,

channel, allowing the attacker to maintain control over the compromised system. The consistent outbound messages from various

and 53.192.68.50 , which are suspected command and control servers. The repeated communication with these addresses

processes to the IP address 202.6.172.98 suggest that this IP may be a command and control server, facilitating further instructions to

suggests attempts to receive commands or exfiltrate data. The consistent outbound connections to 53.192.68.50 , particularly

the compromised system.

from processes like biguwcmnsucig.exe and GoogleUpdate.exe , indicate that the attacker was likely maintaining a command

Privilege Escalation:

and control channel to execute further commands or exfiltrate data. The logs also indicate consistent communication with the

The use of legitimate modules such as Microsoft.Powershell.Commands.Diagnostics.ni.dll and

multicast address 239.255.255.250 , which may suggest a C2 channel being established for further instructions or data

Microsoft.WSMan.Management.ni.dll indicates attempts to escalate privileges and gain unauthorized access to sensitive system

exfiltration.

functionalities.

...... ...... ..... ...... ...... .....

.......... ...... ...... ......

Table of Indicators of Compromise (IoCs)

Table of Indicators of Compromise (IoCs)

IoC

Security Context

IoC

Security Context

python.exe

Legitimate Python executable; high likelihood of exploitation if used to run malicious scripts.

202.6.172.98

An external IP address frequently used for C2 communications. High likelihood of exploitation.

cKfGW.exe

Suspicious executable; potential for malicious activity.

142.20.57.246

Another external IP address involved in inbound communications. Potentially malicious.

53.192.68.50

External IP address; potential command and control server.

10.20.0.2

Internal IP address; potential C2 server.

142.20.61.132

External IP address; potential command and control server.

10.50.2.101

Internal IP address; potential C2 server.

142.20.56.52

External IP address; potential command and control server.

10.50.5.11

Internal IP address; potential C2 server.

239.255.255.250

Multicast address; legitimate in certain contexts but often exploited for reconnaissance.

svchost.exe

A legitimate Windows process that can be exploited for malicious purposes. Moderate to high risk.

... ... ... ... ...

... ... ... ... ...

... ... ... ...

... ... ... ...

biguwcmnsucig.exe

Executable file exhibiting suspicious behavior; high likelihood of exploitation.

powershell.exe

Legitimate Windows process often used for scripting; can be exploited for malicious commands.

conhost.exe

Legitimate Windows process; can be exploited for malicious purposes. Moderate exploitation risk.

lsass.exe

Windows process for managing security policies; can be targeted for credential harvesting.

taskhostw.exe

Legitimate Windows process; can be exploited for malicious purposes. Moderate exploitation risk.

cmd.exe

Command-line interpreter; can be used for executing commands and scripts maliciously.

backgroundtaskHost.exe

Legitimate Windows process; can be exploited for malicious purposes. Moderate exploitation risk.

wmiprvse.exe

Windows Management Instrumentation process; can be exploited for remote management tasks.

GoogleUpdate.exe

Legitimate updater for Google applications; can be misused for persistence.

cmd.exe

Command-line interface that can be used for legitimate or malicious commands. Moderate risk.

taskhostw.exe

Windows process for running tasks; can be exploited for scheduled tasks.

schtasks.exe

Windows task scheduler; can be used to create scheduled tasks for persistence. Moderate risk.

conhost.exe

Console host process; can be used to execute commands in a console window.

wmiprvse.exe

Windows Management Instrumentation process; can be exploited for reconnaissance. Moderate risk.

compattelrunner.exe

Windows process for compatibility telemetry; can be exploited for persistence.

csrss.exe

Client/Server Runtime Subsystem; critical for Windows, can be targeted for exploitation. High risk.

NETSTAT.EXE

Network utility to display active connections; can be used for reconnaissance.

cscript.exe

Windows script host for executing scripts; can be used for malicious scripts. Moderate risk.

PING.EXE

Utility for testing network connectivity; can be used for reconnaissance.

GoogleUpdate.exe

Legitimate updater for Google applications; can be exploited for persistence. Moderate risk.

schtasks.exe

Utility for managing scheduled tasks; can be exploited for persistence.

... ... ... ...

... ... ... ...

Chronological Log of Actions

Chronological Log of Actions

September 25, 2019

September 24, 2019

09:19: START_INBOUND the flow: 239.255.255.250 (19 times) / MESSAGE_INBOUND the flow: 239.255.255.250 (16 times) /
MESSAGE_OUTBOUND the flow: 239.255.255.250 (2 times) / START_OUTBOUND the flow: 239.255.255.250 / READ the file:

10:30: NGentask.exe , conhost.exe , csrss.exe , ngen.exe , services.exe , and svchost.exe read SVCHOST.EXE-CA1952BB.pf .

SVCHOST.EXE-135A30D8.pf

12:22: lsass.exe , services.exe , and svchost.exe read svchost.exe .

09:20: The process python.exe was invoked to read multiple files, including sensitive files such as node_id.txt and ncr.key . /

... ... ... ...

START_INBOUND the flow: 239.255.255.250 (18 times) / MESSAGE_INBOUND the flow: 239.255.255.250 (15 times)

14:10

09:23 - 10:11 : START_INBOUND the flow: 239.255.255.250 (171 times) / MESSAGE_INBOUND the flow: 239.255.255.250 (94 times)

svchost.exe wrote mantra.log (8 times).

10:27: The process conhost.exe initiated outbound communication to the IP address 53.192.68.50 .

svchost.exe sent outbound messages to 202.6.172.98 (7 times).

10:30: The process biguwcmnsucig.exe initiated outbound communication to the IP address 53.192.68.50 .

14:19: services.exe and svchost.exe read svchost.exe .

10:47: The process biguwcmnsucig.exe initiated outbound communication to the IP address 53.192.68.50 .

14:28: lsass.exe and services.exe read svchost.exe .

10:48: The process taskhostw.exe initiated outbound communication to the IP address 53.192.68.50 .

16:23
wmiprvse.exe , AUDIODG.EXE , lsass.exe , and services.exe read SVCHOST.EXE-824A39CF.pf .

10:49: The process biguwcmnsucig.exe initiated outbound communication to the IP address 53.192.68.50 .

lsass.exe and services.exe read SVCHOST.EXE::$EA and svchost.exe .

10:54: The process backgroundtaskHost.exe initiated outbound communication to the IP address 53.192.68.50 .

The logs from the provided reports reveal a complex and multi-faceted attack involving the exploitation of legitimate processes and the

10:55: The process biguwcmnsucig.exe initiated outbound communication to the IP address 53.192.68.50 .

establishment of C2 communications. The identified IoCs warrant immediate investigation and remediation actions to mitigate the risks

10:57: The process cmd.exe initiated outbound communication to the IP address 53.192.68.50 .

associated with this APT attack. Continuous monitoring and analysis of network traffic and system behavior are essential to prevent further

10:59: The process schtasks.exe initiated outbound communication to the IP address 53.192.68.50 .

exploitation and ensure the integrity of the affected systems.

11:00: The process conhost.exe initiated outbound communication to the IP address 53.192.68.50 .
... ... ... ... ...
This report highlights the suspicious activities and potential indicators of compromise that warrant further investigation to mitigate
any potential threats. Immediate actions should be taken to secure the environment and analyze the extent of the compromise.

Figure 7: A simplified version of the comprehensive attack
report recovered from host ‘51’ in the DARPA OpTC dataset,
where the red team performed a Malicious Upgrade attack.

Figure 8 showcases the attack report recovered from host ‘501’
of the DARPA OpTC dataset, highlighting a Powershell Empire attack scenario. The report successfully identified key elements of the
attack, including the powershell.exe script injected during the initial compromise, the command and control server at 202.6.172.98,
the windows management instrumentation process wmiprvse.exe
exploited for privilege escalation, and the schtasks.exe process
utilized to manage and automate scheduled tasks. Furthermore,

Figure 8: A simplified version of the comprehensive report
recovered from host ‘501’ in DARPA OpTC dataset, where the
red team performed a Custom PowerShell Empire attack.
it highlighted the network utility process netstat.exe used for
reconnaissance and the scanned IP address 142.20.57.246.

D

Multi-Hop Expansions Analysis

Table 7 compares one-hop and two-hop expansion strategies across
multiple datasets. While two-hop expansion slightly reduces false
negatives in some cases (e.g., TC3 THEIA, OpTC 201, and OpTC 51),
it often introduces a large number of false positives, significantly
reducing precision. For example, in THEIA, false negatives reduced
from 5 to 2, but false positives rose sharply from 0 to 21.5 K, reducing

OCR-APT: Reconstructing APT Stories from Audit Logs using Subgraph
Anomaly Detection and LLMs

Table 7: Impact of one-hop vs. two-hop expansion on detection performance across datasets.
Dataset
TC3
(CADETS)
TC3
(TRACE)
TC3
(THEIA)
OpTC
(201)
OpTC
(501)
OpTC
(51)
NODLINK
(Ubuntu)
NODLINK
(WS 12)
NODLINK
(W 10)

Expansion
one-hop
two-hop
one-hop
two-hop
one-hop
two-hop
one-hop
two-hop
one-hop
two-hop
one-hop
two-hop
one-hop
two-hop
one-hop
two-hop
one-hop
two-hop

FP
0
0
173
269
0
21.5K
0
3
0
2
17
26
1
0
13
13
9
0

FN
2
2
1
1
5
2
7
6
0
0
39
29
0
0
3
3
1
1

Precision
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.50
1.00
0.95
1.00
0.99
0.89
0.84
0.95
1.00
0.74
0.74
0.95
1.00

Recall
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.88
0.90
1.00
1.00
0.77
0.83
1.00
1.00
0.93
0.93
0.99
0.99

F1-Score
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.67
0.94
0.92
1.00
1.00
0.82
0.84
0.97
1.00
0.82
0.82
0.97
1.00

Table 8: Impact of Lifespan and Cumulative Active Time
(CumActive) Features on Detection Performance across
datasets.
Dataset
TC3
(CADETS)
TC3
(TRACE)
TC3
(THEIA)
OpTC
(201)
OpTC
(501)
OpTC
(51)
NODLINK
(Ubuntu)

precision from 1.0 to 0.5. In most datasets, the gains from two-hop
expansion are minimal or negligible. Based on this trade-off, we
selected one-hop expansion as the default expansion method.

NODLINK
(WS 12)

E

NODLINK
(W 10)

Feature Selection Analysis

As part of our feature selection process, we evaluated two additional
temporal features: Lifespan, defined as the duration between a
node’s first and last observed actions, and Cumulative Active Time,
defined as the total time between consecutive actions with gaps
under one second. To assess their effectiveness, we created three
system variants: our proposed system, one with the Lifespan feature
(With Lifespan), and one with the Cumulative Active Time feature
(With CumActive). OCR-APT uses two core behavioral features—
normalized action frequency and idle period statistics—selected for
their ability to generalize across diverse hosts.
As shown in Table 8, the Lifespan feature yielded minor improvements on a few hosts. On OpTC 51, it slightly boosted recall
compared to OCR-APT, and on Ubuntu and W10, it slightly improved precision by eliminating false positives. However, its performance dropped sharply on other hosts. On WS12, it led to complete
failure—F1 score fell to zero due to missed detections (𝑇 𝑃 = 0). Similarly, on OpTC 201, Lifespan caused a substantial drop in precision
(from 1.00 to 0.49), severely degrading the F1 score.
The Cumulative Active Time feature showed a modest benefit
only on W10, where it slightly reduced false positives compared to
OCR-APT. On all other hosts, however, it either did not improve
performance or led to degradation. On WS12, its inclusion once
again led to detection failure, replicating the poor performance observed with Lifespan on this host. On OpTC 201, it sharply reduced
precision (to 0.44), and on Ubuntu, it introduced a large number of
false positives (23, compared to just one in OCR-APT).
Overall, although both features offered marginal gains on a few
hosts, their lack of stability and the significant performance drops
on others led us to exclude them from the final system. We also

Version
With Lifespan
With CumActive
OCR-APT
With Lifespan
With CumActive
OCR-APT
With Lifespan
With CumActive
OCR-APT
With Lifespan
With CumActive
OCR-APT
With Lifespan
With CumActive
OCR-APT
With Lifespan
With CumActive
OCR-APT
With Lifespan
With CumActive
OCR-APT
With Lifespan
With CumActive
OCR-APT
With Lifespan
With CumActive
OCR-APT

FP
0
18
0
38
180
173
137
153
0
57
55
0
4
1
0
20
17
17
0
23
1
78
54
13
0
3
9

FN
1
1
2
0
0
1
5
5
5
6
16
7
0
0
0
36
39
39
0
0
0
40
40
3
1
1
1

Precision
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99
1.00
0.49
0.44
1.00
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.87
0.89
0.89
1.00
0.44
0.95
0.00
0.00
0.74
1.00
0.98
0.95

Recall
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.90
0.73
0.88
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.79
0.77
0.77
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.93
0.99
0.99
0.99

F1-Score
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.63
0.55
0.94
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.83
0.82
0.82
1.00
0.61
0.97
0.00
0.00
0.82
1.00
0.99
0.97

excluded features such as most active hours due to limited generalizability and potential dataset bias. Simulated datasets may not
reflect real-world attacker behavior, as adversaries can evade detection by operating during typical business hours—periods that are
increasingly difficult to define due to flexible work schedules and
remote access. Our findings validate the selected feature set, though
a broader exploration of alternative temporal features remains an
open direction for future research.

