2026 40th International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN) | 979-8-3315-7896-1/26/$31.00 ©2026 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICOIN68469.2026.11480478

Causal-IDS: Detecting Network Intrusions as
Causal Mechanism Violations
1st Phuc Hao Do

2nd Tran Duc Le

Department of Software Engineering
Danang Architecture University
Da Nang, Viet Nam
haodp@dau.edu.vn

Department of Mathematics, Statistics & Computer Science
University of Wisconsin-Stout
Menomonie, WI, USA
let@uwstout.edu

3rd Truong Duy Dinh

4th Van Dai Pham

Faculty of Information Security
Posts and Telecommunications Institute of Technology
Ha Noi, Viet Nam
duydt@ptit.edu.vn

Metropolia Vietnam
FPT University
Ha Noi, Viet Nam
daipv11@fe.edu.vn

and CPU load, consequently misclassifying a benign
flash crowd event as a malicious Distributed Denial-ofService (DDoS) attack because it fails to discern the
underlying cause-and-effect relationship [3].
This paper argues that the key to building more
robust and reliable IDSs lies in a paradigm shift from
correlational to causal reasoning. We posit that an attack
is not merely a statistical anomaly but an external intervention that disrupts the natural causal mechanisms of
a network. A DDoS attack, for example, does not arise
from the network’s internal dynamics (e.g., a sudden
increase in legitimate users); it is exogenously imposed
by a botnet. This intervention breaks the established
causal chain between legitimate user activity and network traffic, a fundamental distinction that correlationbased models cannot inherently make.
To address this gap, we introduce Causal-IDS, a
framework grounded in structural causal inference [4].
The core principle is to first learn a model of a
network’s normal cause-and-effect relationships from
benign traffic. Intrusions are then identified as significant violations of these learned causal laws. Our main
contributions are threefold:

Abstract—Machine learning-based Intrusion Detection
Systems (IDS) often suffer from high false positive rates,
as they learn statistical correlations rather than the
underlying cause-and-effect dynamics of network traffic.
This paper introduces Causal-IDS, a novel framework that
addresses this gap by leveraging causal inference. CausalIDS first learns a Structural Causal Model representing
the normal operational mechanisms of a network from
benign data. Intrusions are then identified not as mere
statistical outliers, but as significant violations of these
learned causal laws, quantified by a Causal Anomaly
Score. We demonstrate that accurately modeling complex,
non-linear relationships is critical, as a naive causal model
with linear assumptions fails. Our enhanced CausalIDS, using Gradient Boosting, is evaluated on the CICIDS2017 dataset, where it significantly outperforms traditional methods like Isolation Forest and Autoencoders.
Notably, it achieves a superior Area Under the ROC
Curve (AUC) of 0.84, showcasing its ability to reliably
distinguish attacks. By focusing on the disruption of causal
mechanisms, our work paves the way for a new class
of robust, interpretable, and more trustworthy intrusion
detection systems.
Index Terms—Network Intrusion Detection, Causal Inference, Anomaly Detection, Machine Learning, Network
Security.

I. I NTRODUCTION

•

The proliferation of sophisticated cyber threats necessitates the development of advanced Intrusion Detection
Systems (IDS) [1]. While machine learning (ML) has
become a cornerstone for automating threat detection,
many existing models are fundamentally limited by
their reliance on statistical correlations. This approach
renders them vulnerable to high false positive (FP)
rates, which leads to alert fatigue and diminishes operator trust [2]. For instance, a standard ML model might
learn a spurious correlation between high traffic volume

•

•

Corresponding author: duydt@ptit.edu.vn

979-8-3315-7896-1/26/$31.00 ©2026 IEEE

522

We design a novel, two-phase IDS framework
that separates causal graph discovery from the
learning of its functional mechanisms, enhancing
both model robustness and interpretability.
We demonstrate the critical importance of accurate mechanism modeling by showing that a
naive Causal-IDS with linear assumptions fails,
whereas our enhanced version using non-linear
models and data standardization achieves superior
performance.
We conduct a rigorous comparative evaluation on
the CIC-IDS2017 dataset [5], showing that our en-

ICOIN 2026

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:51:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

hanced Causal-IDS significantly outperforms standard anomaly detection baselines with a superior
Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) of 0.84.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II reviews related work. Section III details the
Causal-IDS framework. Section IV presents the experimental evaluation. Section V discusses the implications
and limitations of our findings. Finally, Section VI
concludes the paper.

malicious interventions. This paper aims to fill this
critical gap by proposing a complete framework for
a causality-aware IDS that moves beyond pairwise
statistical prediction to a mechanistic understanding of
network operations.
III. T HE P ROPOSED C AUSAL -IDS F RAMEWORK
Our proposed Causal-IDS framework is designed to
detect intrusions by identifying violations of a learned
structural causal model. The framework operates in
two distinct phases: an offline training phase for model
construction and an online detection phase for real-time
scoring, as illustrated in Fig. 1.

II. R ELATED W ORK
The application of machine learning to IDS has been
extensively studied, primarily following two paradigms:
supervised classification and unsupervised anomaly detection. Supervised methods like Support Vector Machines (SVM) and Random Forests excel at detecting
known threats but fail to identify novel, zero-day attacks
[6]. To address this, unsupervised methods such as
Isolation Forest and Autoencoders have gained traction
by learning a model of normal behavior and flagging
significant deviations as potential intrusions [7]–[9].
Despite their successes, a fundamental challenge
persists across both paradigms: they are inherently
correlational. These models learn statistical regularities
but lack a deeper understanding of the system’s underlying data-generating process. This ”correlation vs.
causation” gap is a primary contributor to high false
positive rates and limited model robustness, motivating
a shift towards a more principled approach [10].
Causal inference offers a direct theoretical solution to
this problem by focusing on discovering and modeling
cause-and-effect relationships from data. In network
analysis, its application has centered on management
and troubleshooting, where causal models have been
used for root cause analysis (RCA) of performance
degradations and failures [11]. These studies typically
employ causal discovery algorithms like the Greedy
Equivalence Search (GES) to construct a causal graph
from observational data [12].
However, applying these techniques to intrusion detection is a largely unexplored frontier, and it is crucial to distinguish our approach from prior causalityinformed methods. Some work, for instance, has used
Granger causality for time-series anomaly detection
[13]. Such methods primarily assess predictive causality
between pairs of time-series variables. In contrast, our
framework learns a comprehensive Structural Causal
Model (SCM) of the entire system [14]. This provides
a more holistic view, allowing us to detect an intrusion
not just as a disruption between two variables, but as
a violation of the underlying functional mechanisms
governing any feature given its direct causes.
While previous works focus on explaining system
behavior, our work pioneers the use of these SCM
violations as the primary signal for detecting external,

Offline Training Phase

Learn Causal
Model

Benign Data

Learned
Model

Deployment

New Traffic

Calculate Anomaly
Score

Decision
Yes

Online Detection Phase

Benign

No

Attack

Fig. 1. The two-phase architecture of the Causal-IDS framework.
The offline phase learns a causal model from benign data, which is
then used by the online phase to score new traffic.

Let X = {X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn } be the set of n random
variables representing the network features. We assume
the data is generated from a Structural Causal Model
[14], which consists of a directed acyclic graph (DAG)
G and a set of functions {fi } describing the causal
mechanisms. The entire process is formally summarized
in Algorithm 1.
A. Phase 1: Causal Mechanism Training (Offline)
This phase leverages a dataset of purely benign
traffic, Dbenign ∈ Rm×n , where m is the number of
samples, to learn the SCM of a normally operating
network.
1) Causal Structure Discovery: The first step is to
discover the underlying causal graph G = (V, E). An
edge Xi → Xj in G signifies that Xi is a direct cause
of Xj . We employ the GES algorithm [15], a prominent
score-based method that heuristically searches the space
of essential graphs to find the one that maximizes a
scoring function. The objective is to find the graph G ∗
that best fits the data:
G ∗ = arg max Score(Dbenign , G)
G

(1)

In this work, we utilize the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) as our scoring function, which balances
model fit with model complexity to prevent overfitting.
It is important to acknowledge that the validity
of the discovered graph G ∗ hinges on several key

523
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:51:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 The Causal-IDS Framework Algorithm
Input: Dbenign (Benign training data), Dtest (Test
data)
Output: Anomaly scores for Dtest
1: Phase 1: Training Phase
2: G ∗ ← GES(Dbenign ) {Discover causal graph}
3: Initialize an empty model set F = {}
4: for each feature Xi in Dbenign do
5:
P a(Xi ) ← Get parents of Xi from G ∗
6:
if P a(Xi ) is empty then
7:
fˆi ← mean(Xi ) {Model is the mean}
8:
else
9:
Xparents ← Select columns for P a(Xi )
10:
fˆi ← GradientBoostingRegressor()
11:
{Train
mechanism
fˆi .fit(Xparents , Xi )
model}
12:
end if
13:
Add fˆi to F
14: end for
15: Phase 2: Detection Phase
16: Initialize empty list Scores
17: for each instance x in Dtest do
18:
total error ← 0
19:
for each feature xi in x do
20:
Get model fˆi from F corresponding to xi
21:
P a(xi ) ← Get parent values of xi from x
22:
x̂i ← fˆi .predict(P a(xi ))
23:
error ← (xi − x̂i )2
24:
total error ← total error + error
25:
end for 
26:
CAS ←
total error/n {Calculate Causal
Anomaly Score (RMSE)}
27:
Append CAS to Scores
28: end for
29: return Scores

relationships for each variable. For each node Xi ∈
V , the SCM assumes that its value is generated by a
function of its parents, P aG ∗ (Xi ), and an independent
noise term ϵi :
Xi := fi (P aG ∗ (Xi ), ϵi )

(2)

We train a predictive model fˆi for each variable Xi to
approximate this mapping. We investigate two distinct
approaches for this task:
• Causal-IDS (Linear): A baseline approach assuming linear relationships, where each fˆi is a
Linear Regression model.
• Causal-IDS (GBoost): Our enhanced approach
capable of capturing complex, non-linear relationships. The data is first standardized, and each fˆi
is a Gradient Boosting Regressor model.
The complete learned model consists of the pair
(G ∗ , {fˆ1 , . . . , fˆn }).
B. Phase 2: Causal Anomaly Detection (Online)

For a new, unseen network flow instance x =
(x1 , . . . , xn ), we quantify its conformity to the learned
causal model. An intrusion is hypothesized to be an external intervention that forces one or more variables to
deviate from their natural causal mechanisms. For each
feature xi , we use its learned model fˆi to generate a
prediction based on the values of its parents, P aG ∗ (x):
x̂i = fˆi (P aG ∗ (x))

(3)

The final Causal Anomaly Score (CAS) [13] for the
entire instance is the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
of these causal errors across all features:


n
 1
CAS(x) = 
(xi − x̂i )2
(4)
n i=1

A high CAS value indicates a significant violation of
the learned causal laws, signaling that the instance is
likely malicious. A threshold is then applied to the CAS
for classification.

assumptions inherent to GES. These include acyclicity (the absence of feedback loops), faithfulness (all
conditional independencies in the data are reflected
in the graph structure), and, most critically, causal
sufficiency (no unmeasured or hidden common causes
of the observed variables). While the acyclicity and
faithfulness assumptions are standard in many causal
discovery settings, causal sufficiency may be violated in
complex network environments. We proceed under the
working assumption that our selected features capture
the most direct causal influences, while acknowledging
the potential for hidden confounders as a limitation
of this study. We chose GES over constraint-based
methods like the PC algorithm due to its demonstrated
statistical efficiency and strong performance in finding
the correct equivalence class of graphs from finite data.
2) Causal Mechanism Learning: Once the optimal
causal graph G ∗ is determined, we learn the functional

IV. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
In this section, we present a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed Causal-IDS framework. We
aim to answer two key research questions: (1) How
critical is non-linear mechanism modeling for a causalbased IDS? (2) How does our enhanced Causal-IDS
perform against standard, non-causal anomaly detection
methods?
A. Dataset and Preprocessing
We conduct our experiments on the CIC-IDS2017
dataset [5], a widely recognized benchmark for evaluating IDSs. To ensure focused analysis and manageable
computation times, we curated a representative subset
by combining traffic from three specific days:

524
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:51:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Monday (Working Hours): Contains exclusively
benign traffic, ideal for training our models.
• Friday Afternoon (DDoS): Contains a large volume of DDoS attack traffic.
• Friday Afternoon (PortScan): Contains Port Scanning attack traffic.
After cleaning invalid rows (containing NaN or Infinity
values), our final dataset consists of 1,041,288 flow
instances. The benign portion, comprising 754,459 instances, is used for training all models, while the entire
dataset is used for evaluation. We selected the 12 key
numerical, flow-based features listed in Table I.
This feature subset was chosen based on established
practices in network traffic analysis and intrusion detection research. The selected variables represent fundamental properties of a network flow, such as its duration, packet counts, byte rates, and inter-arrival times.
This approach prioritizes core traffic characteristics
while excluding highly correlated or redundant features
that can compromise the stability and interpretability of
causal discovery algorithms.

For the baseline models, we ensured a robust comparison by providing sufficient complexity and performing
basic hyperparameter tuning. The Autoencoder, built
with PyTorch, featured a symmetric architecture of
12-8-4-8-12 neurons with ReLU activation functions,
an encoding dimension of 4, and was trained for 10
epochs using the Adam optimizer and Mean Squared
Error (MSE) loss. For both the Isolation Forest and
the Autoencoder, key hyperparameters (e.g., the ‘contamination‘ parameter for IF; latent dimension and
learning rate for AE) were selected based on common
practices and performance on a validation split of the
training data. All experiments were conducted on a
server equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU.

•

D. Results and Analysis
The comprehensive performance comparison is presented in Table II, with ROC curves shown in Fig. 2.
All reported AUC values are consistent across the text,
table, and figures.
TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF A LL M ETHODS . O UR
ENHANCED C AUSAL -IDS (GB OOST ) ACHIEVES THE HIGHEST
AUC WHILE MAINTAINING THE TARGET LOW FPR. A LL AUC
VALUES ARE CONSISTENT WITH F IG . 2.

TABLE I
S ELECTED F EATURES FOR E XPERIMENTS
Feature Name

Feature Name

Flow Duration
Total Fwd Packets
Total Backward Packets
Total Length of Fwd Packets
Fwd Packet Length Mean
Bwd Packet Length Mean

Flow Bytes/s
Flow Packets/s
Flow IAT Mean
Fwd IAT Mean
Init Win bytes forward
Init Win bytes backward

Method

Precision

Recall

F1-Score

FPR

AUC

Isolation Forest
Autoencoder

0.2879
0.6837

0.2923
0.2843

0.2901
0.4017

0.2748
0.0500

0.6039
0.6698

Causal-IDS (Linear)
Causal-IDS (GBoost)

0.0002
0.6872

0.0000
0.2889

0.0000
0.4068

0.0500
0.0500

0.4011
0.8400

B. Baselines and Evaluation Metrics
We compare our Causal-IDS variants against two
widely-used anomaly detection baselines:
• Isolation Forest (IF): A tree-based ensemble
method that identifies anomalies by their susceptibility to isolation [8].
• Autoencoder (AE): A neural network that learns
a compressed representation of normal data, using
reconstruction error as the anomaly score [9].
Performance is assessed using Precision, Recall, F1Score, False Positive Rate, and the Area Under the
Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve. For thresholdbased metrics, we select the threshold as the 95th
percentile of anomaly scores on the benign training
data, targeting a 5% FPR.
C. Implementation Details
All models were implemented in Python. For
Causal-IDS, we used the ‘causal-learn‘ library for
GES discovery. The Linear model used ‘scikit-learn‘’s
‘LinearRegression‘, and the GBoost model used ‘GradientBoostingRegressor‘ with 50 estimators and a max
depth of 3.

Fig. 2. ROC Curve comparison. Causal-IDS (GBoost) demonstrates
superior discriminative power across all thresholds. AUC values in
the legend should be updated to match Table II: GBoost (0.84),
Autoencoder (0.67), Isolation Forest (0.60), and Linear (0.40).

The Importance of Non-Linear Modeling: The first
key finding is the stark contrast between the two CausalIDS variants. The Linear model completely fails (F1-

525
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:51:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Score ≈ 0, AUC ≈ 0.40), indicating that its assumption
of linear causal mechanisms is fundamentally flawed for
complex network traffic. In contrast, the GBoost version
achieves a strong F1-score of 0.4068. This result empirically validates our hypothesis that accurately modeling
the complexity of causal mechanisms is as crucial as
discovering the causal structure itself.
Comparison with Baselines: The Isolation Forest
baseline suffers from an extremely high FPR (27.5%),
rendering it impractical for real-world deployment. The
Autoencoder is a much stronger baseline, achieving a
competitive F1-score at the target 5% FPR. Impressively, our Causal-IDS (GBoost) model matches this F1
performance at the chosen threshold. However, the true
superiority of our causal approach is revealed by the
AUC metric. Our Causal-IDS (GBoost) achieves an
AUC of 0.84, significantly outperforming the Autoencoder (0.67) and Isolation Forest (0.60). This indicates
that the Causal Anomaly Score is a more robust and reliable indicator of malicious activity than reconstruction
error or isolation scores across all decision thresholds.

an external intervention, often manipulates a specific
feature (e.g., flooding a port, thus controlling packet
rates) while leaving its normal causes unchanged.
This breaks the learned functional relationship Xi ≈
fˆi (P aG ∗ (Xi )), resulting in a high Causal Anomaly
Score for that feature. This focus on mechanism violation, rather than just distributional rarity, provides a
more robust and direct detection signal.
B. Interpretability and Actionable Insights
A significant advantage of our framework is its
inherent interpretability, which operates at two levels:
the global causal graph and the local, instance-specific
score. While the individual Gradient Boosting models
are complex, the high-level causal graph G ∗ is humanreadable, allowing an analyst to inspect the model’s
baseline assumptions about normal network behavior.
More importantly, when an alert is triggered, the Causal
Anomaly Score can be decomposed to provide actionable insights.
1) An Interpretability Walkthrough: To make this
concrete, we provide a procedural walkthrough of how
an analyst could diagnose an alert for a DDoS attack.
• Inspect the Relevant Causal Sub-Graph: First,
the analyst examines the learned graph G ∗ .
Suppose it contains the plausible chain: Flow
Duration → Flow Packets/s → Flow
IAT Mean. This represents the normal mechanism where, for a given duration, the rate of
packets causally influences their mean inter-arrival
time.
• Decompose the Anomaly Score: A DDoS attack
instance triggers an alert with a high CAS. The
analyst’s first diagnostic step is to decompose the
total squared error, which defines the CAS, into
its per-feature contributions: (xi − x̂i )2 . They can
then rank features by the magnitude of this causal
error.
• Pinpoint the Violated Mechanism: In our DDoS
scenario, the analyst would likely find that the
feature Flow Packets/s has the largest causal
error. The observed value, xpackets/s , is exceptionally high due to the attack flood. However, the
model’s prediction, x̂packets/s , which is based on the
value of its cause Flow Duration, would be
much lower, reflecting normal behavior for a flow
of that duration.
• Derive Actionable Insight: The large discrepancy between the observed and predicted packet
rate provides a clear diagnosis: the mechanism
for Flow Packets/s has been violated. The
feature is being manipulated by an external force,
independent of its learned cause. This allows the
analyst to conclude not just that the traffic is
anomalous, but why: the packet rate is unnaturally

Fig. 3. Distribution of Causal Anomaly Scores for the enhanced
Causal-IDS (GBoost) model, showing a clear separation between the
scores of Benign and Attack traffic.

V. D ISCUSSION
Our experimental results give rise to several important discussion points regarding the application of
causal inference to intrusion detection.
A. Why a Causal Approach Works
The superior performance of the Causal-IDS
(GBoost) model, particularly its high AUC, suggests
that a causality-based approach captures a more fundamental aspect of intrusions. While methods like
Autoencoders are adept at learning a low-dimensional
manifold for normal data, they are agnostic to the
underlying data-generating process. An attack that is
statistically novel but does not significantly deviate
from this learned manifold might be missed.
In contrast, our Causal-IDS focuses on the mechanisms that produce the data. An attack, by its nature as

526
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:51:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

high for its context. This level of transparency is
absent in purely black-box models and is crucial
for building operator trust.

R EFERENCES
[1] G. D. C. Bertoli, L. A. P. Júnior, O. Saotome, A. L. Dos Santos,
F. A. N. Verri, C. A. C. Marcondes, S. Barbieri, M. S. Rodrigues, and J. M. P. De Oliveira, “An end-to-end framework
for machine learning-based network intrusion detection system,”
IEEE access, vol. 9, pp. 106 790–106 805, 2021.
[2] M. N. Zaeem and M. Komeili, “Cause and effect: Conceptbased explanation of neural networks,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC).
IEEE, Oct. 2021, p. 2730–2736.
[3] K. N. Mallikarjunan, K. Muthupriya, and S. M. Shalinie, “A
survey of distributed denial of service attack,” in 2016 10th
International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Control
(ISCO). IEEE, Jan. 2016, p. 1–6.
[4] H. Sitter, W. Lorenz, H.-J. Klotter, and H. Lill, “Models for
causality assessment,” in Handbook of Mediators in Septic
Shock. CRC press, 2019, pp. 500–522.
[5] I. Sharafaldin, A. Habibi Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion
traffic characterization,” in Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy, vol. 1,
no. 2018. SCITEPRESS - Science and Technology Publications, 2018, pp. 108–116.
[6] M. A. M. Hasan, M. Nasser, B. Pal, and S. Ahmad, “Support
vector machine and random forest modeling for intrusion detection system (ids),” Journal of Intelligent Learning Systems
and Applications, vol. 06, no. 01, p. 45–52, 2014.
[7] P. H. Do, T. D. Le, V. Vishnevsky, A. Berezkin, and R. Kirichek,
“A horizontal federated learning approach to iot malware traffic
detection: An empirical evaluation with n-baiot dataset,” in 2024
26th International Conference on Advanced Communications
Technology (ICACT). IEEE, Feb. 2024, p. 1494–1506.
[8] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in
2008 Eighth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining.
IEEE, Dec. 2008, p. 413–422.
[9] Y. Song, S. Hyun, and Y.-G. Cheong, “Analysis of autoencoders
for network intrusion detection,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 13, p.
4294, Jun. 2021.
[10] V. Z. Mohale and I. C. Obagbuwa, “Evaluating machine
learning-based intrusion detection systems with explainable
ai: enhancing transparency and interpretability,” Frontiers in
Computer Science, vol. 7, May 2025.
[11] Y. Zhang, Z. Guan, H. Qian, L. Xu, H. Liu, Q. Wen, L. Sun,
J. Jiang, L. Fan, and M. Ke, “Cloudrca: A root cause analysis
framework for cloud computing platforms,” in Proceedings
of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information &
Knowledge Management, ser. CIKM ’21. ACM, Oct. 2021, p.
4373–4382.
[12] M. Chickering, “Statistically efficient greedy equivalence
search,” in Proceedings of the 36th Conference on Uncertainty
in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), ser. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, J. Peters and D. Sontag, Eds., vol. 124.
PMLR, 03–06 Aug 2020, pp. 241–249. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v124/chickering20a.html
[13] Z. Liu, M. Gao, and P. Jiao, “Gcad: Anomaly detection in multivariate time series from the perspective of granger causality,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
vol. 39, no. 18, 2025, pp. 19 041–19 049.
[14] S. Arif and M. A. MacNeil, “Applying the structural causal
model framework for observational causal inference in ecology,”
Ecological Monographs, vol. 93, no. 1, Nov. 2022.
[15] A. Nazaret and D. Blei, “Extremely greedy equivalence search,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19551, 2025.

C. Limitations and Future Work
Despite the promising results, our work has several
limitations that open avenues for future research.
• Causal Discovery Accuracy: As discussed in Section III, the performance of Causal-IDS depends
on the correctness of the discovered graph, which
hinges on assumptions like causal sufficiency.
While we proceeded by selecting features known
to be important, future work should explore advanced causal discovery algorithms that are robust
to hidden confounders or can incorporate expert
domain knowledge to constrain the graph search
space.
• Static Graph Assumption: Our current model
learns a single, static causal graph. However, network behavior can be dynamic, and the underlying
causal relationships might change over time (concept drift). Developing methods for dynamically
updating the causal model online is a crucial next
step for long-term deployment.
• Scalability: While demonstrated on a substantial
dataset, applying causal discovery to networks
with hundreds or thousands of features remains
computationally challenging. Exploring scalable
causal discovery techniques or feature selection
methods guided by causal principles would be a
valuable research direction.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we addressed the critical challenge of
high false positive rates in machine learning-based IDSs
by proposing a paradigm shift from correlational to
causal reasoning. We introduced Causal-IDS, a framework that models a network’s normal behavior as a
Structural Causal Model and identifies intrusions as
violations of its learned cause-and-effect mechanisms.
Our extensive experiments on the CIC-IDS2017
dataset yielded two key findings. First, we demonstrated
that accurately modeling the complex, non-linear relationships in network traffic is critical, as a naive causal
model with linear assumptions failed entirely. Second,
our enhanced Causal-IDS, combining causal discovery
with robust Gradient Boosting models, proved highly
effective. It not only matched a strong Autoencoder
baseline at a fixed low false positive rate but also significantly surpassed all baselines in overall discriminative
power, achieving a superior AUC of 0.84.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work has been sponsored by the scientific research from Posts and Telecommunications Institute of
Technology, Vietnam

527
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:51:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

