IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

10693

LiNGAM-SF: Causal Structural Learning Method
With Linear Non-Gaussian Acyclic
Models for Streaming Features
Chenglin Zhang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Hong Yu , Member, IEEE,
Guoyin Wang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Yongfang Xie , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— The causal structure learning for streaming features
(CSLSFs) faces the following challenges: 1) the precision of
learned causal structures is limited due to the score-based
learning method and 2) they fail to detect the latent confounders.
To address the challenges, this article proposes a novel causal
structure learning method with linear non-Gaussian acyclic
models for streaming features (LiNGAM-SFs), which utilizes the
causal identifiability of the data. It is the first time to utilize
LiNGAMs for online causal structure learning. First, we utilize
the classical SF algorithm to learn the causal skeleton. This article
provides the property of this skeleton, proving that two adjacent
variables on an edge is one of three possible structures. Second,
we give two propositions and identify the causal directions
in the presence of latent variables (ICDPLV) subalgorithm to
distinguish among the three structures and precisely identify the
causal directions. In addition, the subalgorithm can output a
candidate set of latent confounders from a local perspective.
Finally, the detecting latent confounder (DLC) subalgorithm
detects the latent confounders in the candidate set with a
global perspective. The precision of the proposed method is
increased at least by 11% on average than those of the stateof-the-art method. Furthermore, the experiments verify that the
LiNGAM-SF method is able to detect the latent confounders.
Index Terms— Causal identifiability, causal structure, latent
confounders, linear non-Gaussian acyclic model (LiNGAM),
streaming features (SFs).

N OMENCLATURE
Notation
Gt
Gt ′
Vt
E

Description
Causal structure at the time t.
Causal skeleton at the time t.
Observed variable set at the time t, where
vi ∈ Vt denotes a observed feature variable.
Directed edge set, where ⟨vi , v j ⟩ ∈ E.

Received 10 January 2024; revised 9 July 2024 and 14 November 2024;
accepted 9 January 2025. Date of publication 23 January 2025; date of current
version 4 June 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62136002, Grant 62233018, and
Grant 62221005; and in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing
under Grant cstc2022ycjh-bgzxm0004. (Corresponding authors: Hong Yu;
Guoyin Wang.)
Chenglin Zhang, Hong Yu, and Guoyin Wang are with Chongqing
Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence, Chongqing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, China (e-mail:
zhangchenglin2021@foxmail.com; yuhong@cqupt.edu.cn; wanggy@cqupt.
edu.cn).
Yongfang Xie is with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China (e-mail:
yfxie@csu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3529753

U

Xo

( j)

ri
A

af
i, j
N
Lt
vi ⊥⊥ v j
sigi , sig2 , r

Undirected edge set, where (vi , v j ) ∈ U
needs to have the directions identified in the
subsequent steps.
Observed data composed of the data xi on
the variable vi ∈ Vt , distinguishing from
the dataset X of all variables under the full
observation.
Residual of regressing xi on x j .
Adjacency matrix representing the causal
strength among the variables, whose element
ai, j refers to the intensity of the direct causal
impact of v j on vi .
Total product of the path coefficients from v j
to vi .
Noise term, where n i ∈ N represents the
noise on vi .
Latent confounders detected at the time t.
Indicating that vi and v j are independent.
Hyperparameter.
I. I NTRODUCTION

A

S THE attention to causality increases, people start to
learn the causal structure from observational data. Currently, most research on causal structure learning focuses on
static data [1], [2], [3]. However, in many real-world applications [4], [5], [6], there are dynamic data where the number of
samples stays constant, while the features keep growing, called
streaming features (SFs) [7]. Although the causal structure
learning method for static data can provide results based on
all features that have arrived, it requires relearning each time
the features increase with lower efficiency. Hence, people carry
out research on the causal structure learning for SFs (CSLSFs).
The research aims to only update the historical causal structure
when new features arrive, instead of relearning.
In recent years, people have begun to pay attention to
CSLSF [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. These studies employ the
scoring-based learning method to select the causal structure
as the desired outcome. Fig. 1(a) indicates the unreliability
of scoring. For instance, on synthetic data, we utilize the
widely used MDL scoring function whose preference lies in
achieving lower scores. The score of the real causal structure
is close to that of Structure 2 (edge reversal) and higher than
that of Structure 6 (edge missing). Therefore, blindly applying

2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10694

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

Fig. 1.
Limitations of the existing CSLSF methods. (a) Scores of the
structures formed by three variables on synthetic data. (b) Ignoring the
existence of latent confounders.

scoring does not yield a precise causal structure. In addition,
the existing methods assume that all feature variables are
observed at any time, neglecting the presence of latent confounders. A latent confounder is an unobserved variable (latent
variable) influencing multiple observed variables. In Fig. 1(b),
the feature variables {v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 , v5 } are observed at the
time t, while the unobserved variables v6 and v7 are latent
confounders. The existing CSLSF methods ignore the latent
confounders {v6 , v7 } and fail to detect them. They focus
solely on the causal relationships among observed variables.
In summary, there are two pressing issues in CSLSF methods
that need resolution: 1) how to learn a precise causal structure
and 2) how to detect latent confounders.
This article addresses the issues in existing CSLSF methods, focusing on linear non-Gaussian data. Many real-world
datasets, such as those concerning stocks, rainfall, and
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) recordings,
conform to the assumption of linear non-Gaussianity [13].
Even in the cases of nonlinearity, the datasets may be approximated or modified to fit a linear relationship [14]. Besides
being widely prevalent, linear non-Gaussian data also demonstrate causal identifiability [15]. Causal identifiability implies
that causal relationships can be uniquely identified from
observed data. Owing to the property, the linear non-Gaussian
acyclic model (LiNGAM) and its various variants have been
successful in causal discovery. Therefore, this article utilizes
the causal identifiability of the data and proposes a method
called LiNGAM-SF to solve the problems of existing CSLSF
methods. As far as we know, it is the first time to dynamically
learn causal structures based on LiNGAM.
This article first proves that the skeleton learned by the
classical algorithm exhibits Property 1, which states that
each edge’s two feature variables can assume three possible
structures: 1) vi → v j or v j → vi ; 2) vi ← lk → v j ,
where lk is a latent confounder; and 3) vi ← lk → v j , and
vi → v j or v j → vi , where lk is a latent confounder. Next, the
proposed LiNGAM-SF provides two propositions and identifies the causal directions in the presence of latent variables
(ICDPLV) subalgorithm based on Property 1 to precisely learn
the causal structure. The precision achieved by the proposed

method is increased at least by 11% on average compared
to those of the state-of-the-art method (see Section IV-C).
The ICDPLV subalgorithm also provides a candidate set of
latent confounders from a local perspective. To further find
the latent confounders, the method designs the detecting latent
confounder (DLC) subalgorithm to filter and detect the latent
confounders from the candidate set with the global perspective.
The proposed method can detect latent confounders in all
designed experimental cases (see Section IV-D).
The contributions of this article are given as follows.
1) This article provides Property 1, which proves that two
adjacent feature variables on the edges of the skeleton
graph only be one of three structures.
2) Based on Property 1, this article proposes two propositions to precisely learn the structure by distinguishing
the structure formed by the adjacent variables. Particularly, the scope of Proposition 1 expands beyond the
limitation that latent variables must only include latent
confounders.
3) This article gives Property 2, describing the attributes
of p feature variables with the common confounder.
Property 2 helps the DLC subalgorithm to identify the
common latent confounders without relying on complex
high-level statistical information.
4) As far as we know, it is the first exploration in
the CSLSF method to detect the latent confounders.
The source codes of the methods are available at
https://github.com/yuhongcqupt/LiNGAM-SF.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
describes the existing causal structure learning methods.
Section III describes the proposed LiNGAM-SF method
in detail. Section IV contains experiments and analysis.
Section V provides conclusions and further work.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Causal Structure Learning Methods With Latent Variables
With the rise of causal learning, people have started to solve
various problems in practice. For instance, Liang et al. [16]
made the first attempt in attribute heterogeneous networks.
Fang et al. [17] broke through the difficulty of dense and
high-dimensional graph structures using low-rank technology.
However, besides these, latent variables are a long-standing
problem.
In the presence of latent variables, the constrained methods are still considered a favorable option because of their
efficiency. Spirtes et al. [18] proposed the fast causal inference (FCI) method based on d-separation. Subsequently,
Richardson [19] proposed the optimization method called
RFCI based on the FCI to learn the causal structure faster.
Since the above methods rely on conditional independence
(CI) tests, they are highly time-consuming to deal with highdimensional data. Therefore, several studies have commenced
decreasing the quantity of CI tests. The MBCS* algorithm
[20] employs the technique of Markov blankets, while the
L-MARVEL method [21] removes the specific variables in the
iterative process of updating causal structure. However, these
constraint-based methods are unable to distinguish Markov
equivalence classes, leading to the existence of undirected
edges within the obtained causal structure.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LiNGAM-SF: CAUSAL STRUCTURAL LEARNING METHOD

The score-based methods can avoid the above issue.
Triantafillou and Tsamardinos [22] transformed the learning
causal structure into a combinatorial optimization problem
and obtained the causal structure by searching with the score.
To further improve the efficiency, Tsirlis et al. [23] first utilized
CI tests to limit the search space and then obtained the
final structure through the greedy search. Bellot and van der
Schaar [24] design a novel scoring method for learning the
causal structure with consideration of latent confounders.
In addition to the score-based methods, the functional
causal models are also capable of distinguishing Markov
equivalence classes. However, these methods need to fulfill some assumptions. The assumption of Gaussian linear
acyclicity is crucial as it signifies the causal identifiability
within the data. Any models meeting this assumption can
be classified within the LiNGAM framework. LiNGAM [15]
and the variant DirectLiNGAM [13] are able to identify the
causal order without latent variables. In the presence of latent
variables, the LvLiNGAM [14], the ParceLiNGAM [25], the
MLCLiNGAM [26], and Salehkaleybar’s method [27] are able
to not only identify the causal order of variables but also detect
latent confounders.
B. CSLSF Methods
Although all the above methods have their own advantages,
none of them can cope with SFs well. The reason is that most
of the learning methods for the causal structure with latent
variables mainly focus on static scenarios and are one-time
learning methods. In the real scenarios of SFs, new features are
continuously added to the observations over time. Therefore,
the above methods will be relearned once new features arrive.
Not exploiting the information of the historical causal graphs
leads to repeated learning with considerable time cost. Hence,
the CSLSF method aims at reducing the learning time in SFs
by utilizing historical causal graphs.
Yu et al. [8] conducted research on SFs and first proposed
causal structure learning methods CDFSF and S-CDFSF. However, they cannot identify the causal order among variables.
For this reason, Guo and Yang [9] proposed an optimized
method called CSBS, but too many CI tests limit the performance of the method. To learn the causal structure faster,
Yang et al. [10] proposed a new method CSSU based on
symmetric uncertainty, but the method is not good at dealing with nonlinear causality. Subsequently, Yang et al. [11]
investigated the data with nonlinear causality and presented
the CANSF method based on the additive noise model. Unlike
the previous two methods, the PRCDSF method [12] is able
to handle linear and nonlinear causality. However, it still uses
scoring to identify the causal direction and learn imprecise
causal structure. Notably, besides studying dynamic scenarios
of SFs, You et al. [28] initially study causal structure learning
with incremental changes in both instances and features,
introducing the C2 SLIFS method.
In order to illustrate the advantages and disadvantages of
each method clearly, the characteristics of CSLSF methods
are summarized in Table I.
From Table I, it can be found that most existing
CSLSF methods learn the structure by scoring. However, the
score-based methods face challenges in learning a precise

10695

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF CSLSF M ETHODS

structure, as shown in Fig. 1(a). In addition, the existing
methods ignore the latent variables, and they are unable
to detect the latent confounders, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b).
Therefore, a new CSLSF method is proposed for linear nonGaussian data.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Problem Definition
Let G = (V, E) denote a causal structure, where V refers to
the set of nodes and indicates the set of features and E is the
set of directed edges on the graph. The edge ⟨vi , v j ⟩ ∈ E
denotes that variable vi ∈ V has a causal effect on
variable v j ∈ V .
The LiNGAM-SF method proposed in this article satisfies
the following basic assumptions.
1) The causal structure G is a directed acyclic graph.
2) Causal faithfulness assumption.
3) Causal Markov assumption.
4) The causal relationship among the variables is linear,
and their data obey the non-Gaussian distribution.
5) The noise terms follow the non-Gaussian distribution
and are independent of each other.
It is assumed that the data set X ∈ Rn×d is obtained
with the full observations, where n is the number of samples
and d denotes the dimension of the feature space under full
observation. The data on the node vi ∈ V are denoted as
xi = X :,i . Since the data generation mechanism is assumed
to be linearly non-Gaussian, the structural equation can be
given
X T = AX T + N

(1)

where A is the adjacency matrix of G and N ∈ Rd×n is the
noise term of the corresponding variable. The element ai, j
refers to the strength of the direct causal effect of v j ∈ V
on vi ∈ V .
For SFs, the observed features are not always complete.
Assuming that at the time t, the data X o ∈ Rn×do from the
set of variables Vt ⊂ V are observed, where do = |Vt |.
As time progresses, new variables are introduced through
streams, contributing to the expansion of the observed data’s
dimension do . The data for the unobserved variables Vl ⊂ V
are expressed as X l ∈ Rn×dl , where dl = |V − Vt |. According
to the method in the literature [27], (1) can be transformed as
follows:
 T 
 T  

Xo
Aoo Aol
Xo
No
=
+
(2)
Al o
Al l
Nl
Xl T
Xl T

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10696

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

Fig. 2. Framework of the LiNGAM-SF, which is summarized in three steps. Step 1: learning the causal skeleton G t ′ (lines 2–6 of Algorithm 1). Step 2:
transforming the causal skeleton G t ′ into a directed graph G t and providing a candidate set of latent confounders (line 7 of Algorithm 1). Step 3: detecting
the latent confounders L t (line 8 of Algorithm 1).

where No and Nl denote the noise terms on the observed
variables Vt and the unobserved variables V − Vt , respectively.
The matrix [ Aoo , Aol ; Al o , Al l ] in (2) corresponds to A in (1).
Based on (2), X o T can be written as follows:
X o T = Bo No + Bl Nl = B N

(3)

where Bo = (I − Aoo − Aol (I − Al l )−1 Al o )−1 and Bl =
(I − Aoo − Aol (I − Al l )−1 Al o )−1 . Akbari et al. [21] explain
that the element of matrix B in (3) indicates whether there is
a causal path between the corresponding variables.
At the time t, the current set of feature variables is Vt ,
and the causal structure is denoted as G t . The LiNGAM-SF
method is to learn the causal structure G t from the observable
data X o .
To ensure clarity, the important notations employed in this
article are summarized in Nomenclature.
B. Framework of LiNGAM-SF Method
Compared with the existing CSLSF methods, the
LiNGAM-SF method can both give a precise causal
structure and detect latent confounders. To achieve this goal,
this article designs the overall framework of the LiNGAM-SF
method. Fig. 2 shows the LiNGAM-SF framework presented
with the real structure of Fig. 1(b) as an example. In the
frame diagram, the undirected graph or a locally directed
graph at the time t can be expressed as G t ′ . The graph
G t ′ = (V, E, U ) is also known as the causal skeleton, where
U represents the set of undirected edges. The undirected
edge is denoted as (vi , v j ) ∈ U , indicating that the causal
direction between vi and v j needs to be further identified.
The pseudocode of the whole process is given in Algorithm 1.
C. Learning of Causal Skeleton
The causal skeleton is an undirected graph constructed with
feature variables. Unlike the maximal ancestral graph, the
partial ancestral graph, and the directed acyclic graph, it does
not contain directional information. Our method employs the
MBCS* algorithm [20] and the CSBS algorithm [9] to learn

Algorithm 1 LiNGAM-SF Algorithm
Input: The causal structure G t−1 ; The observed data X o ;
The feature sets Vt−1 and Vt ; The sampling rate r ; Two
significant coefficients sig1 , sig2
Output: The causal structure G t ; The set of latent confounders L t
1: Initial L t ← ∅ and G t ← ∅;
2: if Vt−1 is Empty then
3:
G t ′ ← MBCS*(Vt , X o , sig1 )
4: else
5:
G t ′ ← CSBS(Vt−1 , Vt , X o , G t−1 , sig1 )
6: end if
▷ The code in lines 2-6 is step 1
7: G t , L alter ← ICDPLV(G t ′ , X o , r , sig2 )
▷ step 2
8: L t ← DLC(G t , L alter , X o )
▷ step 3
9: return G t and L t

the causal skeleton G t ′ without any steps to identify the
direction.
The MBCS* algorithm, a static method, is used for learning
the initial skeleton G 1 ′ due to its efficiency. As new variables
become observable, the CSBS algorithm dynamically updates
the skeleton G t ′ , t ∈ {2, 3, 4, . . . , }. Supposed that the neighbor set of variable vi on the skeleton is denoted as N (vi ), the
update requires that vi and its neighbor v j ∈ N (vi ) satisfy
 the
condition: vi ̸⊥⊥ v j |∅ and ¬∃s ⊆ N (vi ) s.t. vi ⊥⊥ v j |s [9].
Notably, the directed edges of G t ′ are treated as undirected in
each update. As shown in Fig. 2, the transformation from G 1 to
G 2 ′ is a process during which the CSBS algorithm updates the
skeleton. The CSBS treats the directed edge v3 → v1 in the G 1
as an undirected edge. As the variable v8 is observable, v1 and
v3 become independent given v8 . Therefore, the directed edge
v3 → v1 is updated to the undirected path v3 − v8 − v1 .
Both algorithms rely on CI tests. In our paper, we adopt the
HSCI [29] with the significance parameter sig1 .
Definition 1 (Observed Direct Path): Assume that there is
a directed path vi → z 1 → z 2 → · · · → z k → v j in the
graph. If all variables {z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z k } on the path are latent
variables, the path is called the observed direct path.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LiNGAM-SF: CAUSAL STRUCTURAL LEARNING METHOD

Fig. 3.

10697

Three possible structures.

We present the following three structures according to
Definition 1.
1) Structure 1: There is an observed direct path between
vi and v j , with neither variable affected by the latent
confounders [see Fig. 3(a)]. It can be represented as
vi → v j or v j → vi .
2) Structure 2: Variables vi and v j are associated only due
to confounding factor lk without any observed direct
path between them [see Fig. 3(b)]. It can be denoted as
vi ← lk → v j .
3) Structure 3: There is an observed direct path between
vi and v j ; both variables are affected by the latent
confounder lk [see Fig. 3(c)]. It can be represented as
vi ← lk → v j and vi → v j or v j → vi .
Property 1: Two adjacent feature variables on the edge
(vi , v j ) of the skeleton graph G t ′ only be one of the three
structures mentioned above.
Proof: When t = 1, the MBCS* is used to learn the
initial skeleton. The literature [20] has demonstrated that the
edge (vi , v j ) ∈ U in the G 0 ′ satisfies the form vi ↔ v j ,
indicating that no set can m-separate vi from v j .
When t = 2, 3 · · · , it can be proved by the inverse method
that (vi , v j ) in the G t ′ learned by the CSBS also satisfies the
form vi ↔ v j . Assuming that (vi , v j ) ∈ U does not follow the
form vi ↔ v j , there are two cases to be discussed separately.
1) vi is not directly connected to v j , and there is a undirected path between vi and v j that include at least one
observed collider. According to the d-separation, it is
known that the collider will block the paths of the feature
variables vi and v j . Therefore, vi and v j are independent.
The conclusion contradicts the condition vi ̸⊥
⊥ v j |∅.
2) vi is not directly connected to v j , and there are no
colliders among the variables on the path between vi and
v j . When there is no collider on the path, the relation
between vi and v j is either vi ← z 1 ← · · · ← z t−1 ←
z t → z t+1 → · · · → z m → v j , where z t is a confounder
or a chain structure such as vi → z 1 → · · · → z m →
v j . For both structures above, the paths of the feature
variables vi and v j are blocked once under z 1 ∈ N (vi )
or z m ∈ N (v j ). The situation is in contradiction with the

condition vi ̸⊥⊥ v j |∅ and ¬∃s ⊆ N (vi ) s.t. vi ⊥⊥ v j |s .
In summary, the edge (vi , v j ) ∈ U on G t ′ satisfies the form
vi ↔ v j . The form reveals that variables vi and v j are not
independent. Moreover, their dependence remains unchanged
under other observed variables. Hence, vi and v j are associated
through a path of latent variables, none of which are colliders.
When there is no confounder on the path, the relationship
between vi and v j belongs to structure 1. When there is exactly
one latent variable acting as a confounder on the path, the
relationship belongs to structure 2. When there are at least two
confounders among the latent variables on the path, a collider

Fig. 4.

Procedure of the ICDPLV subalgorithm.

must exist, and the relationship does not satisfy the form
vi ↔ v j . Otherwise, the relationship between vi and v j can be
a combination of structures 1 and 2. Therefore, our property
is confirmed.
□
D. ICDPLV Algorithm
The graph G 1 ′ , G 2 ′ , . . . , G t ′ represents the learned skeleton
structure. To more precisely confirm the directed structures
of the graph, we propose the ICDPLV subalgorithm based
on the causal identifiability of the data. The subalgorithm
distinguishes among the three previously described structures
to provide the precise causal structure. It also gives a candidate
set of latent confounders L alter . We denote a latent confounder
using the variables it affects. For instance, in Structure 2 and
Structure 3, the latent confounder lk is indicated by [vi , v j ].
The whole procedure of the subalgorithm is shown in Fig. 4.
1) Proposition 1: Proposition 1 is prepared to exclude the
possibilities of Structure 2 and Structure 3 affected by latent
confounders and to identify the causal direction of two variables in Structure 1. Although existing research has provided
lemmas and propositions for identifying causal directions and
DLCs, their assumptions require that the latent variables must
only include latent confounders. They are unable to handle the
situation where latent mediators v8 are present in Fig. 1(b).
Therefore, we extend the existing lemmas and propositions
and present Proposition 1.
Theorem 1 (D-S Theorem [13]): Define two random variables y1 and y2 as linear combinations of independent random
variables si for i = 1, . . . , q
y1 =

q
X
i=1

bi si ,

y2 =

q
X

ci si .

(4)

i=1

If there is a non-Gaussian si with bi ci ̸ = 0, y1 and y2 are
dependent.
Based on Theorem 1, this article gives the following proposition to identify Structure 1.
Proposition 1: Assuming that the existing assumptions are
fulfilled, for the edge (vi , v j ) in the graph G′t , the residual
is denoted as ri ( j ) = xi − (cov xi , x j /var x j ) × x j . If the
residual is independent of the data x j of the variable v j , then
v j → vi , and the two variables are not affected by the latent
confounders.
To clarify the proof of Proposition 1, we provide the
following definition.
Definition 2 (Branch Variable Set): Assuming that all variables are fully observed, the directed path vi → z 1 →
· · · → z t → · · · → z k → v j in the graph G is denoted
as P(vi , v j ). For any variable z t on the path P(vi , v j ), the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10698

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

branch variable set of H (P(vi , v j ), z t ) is defined as Pa(z t ) \
{vi , z 1 , . . . , z k , v j }, where Pa(z t ) represents the parent variables of z t . The overall branch variable
set for the path
S
P(vi , v j ) is given by H (P(vi , v j )) = kt=1 H (P(vi , v j ), z t ).
Proof: We can assume that either vi → v j or both variables are influenced by common latent confounders L. For any
xi ∈ xi and x j ∈ x j , all paths from vi P
to v j can be expressed
with a structural equation as af
g
e1 ,
j,i x i +
j,h x h + n
h∈H (vi ,v j ) a
where af
and
a
g
denote
the
total
product
of
path
coefj,i
j,h
ficients along P(vi , v j ) and from the branch variables set
H (P(vi , v j )) to v j , respectively. The variable ne1 is a linear
combination of noise terms correlated with multiple latent
variables along the path. Similarly, the contribution from the
confounders
P l ∈ L to variable v j , excluding vi , is given by
af
g
e2 , where P(l, v j ) \ vi refers
j,l xl +
j,h x h + n
h∈H (P(l,v j )\vi ) a
to all paths from l to v j , which do not include vi . Thus, the
data x j can be formatted by the following structural equation:


X
ag
e1 
x j = baf
j,i x i +
j,h x h + n
h∈H (P(vi ,v j ))


X
X
+ c
af
j,l xl +

l∈L h∈H (P(l,v j )\vi )

l∈L

X

+

(5)

where Pa ′ (v j ) denote the nodes in Pa(v j ), which are not on
paths P(vi , v j ) and P(l, v j ) \ vi , n j is the noise term for v j ,
and b and c indicate the path existence. The variables b and
c satisfy b, c ∈ 0, 1 and b + c ̸ = 0. Similarly, xi is expressed
as follows:
X
X
X
xi = c(
af
af
e3 )
i,l xl +
i,h x h + n
l∈L h∈H (P(l,vi ))

X

+

ai, p x p + n i

(6)

p∈Pa ′ (vi )

where Pa ′ (vi ) denote the nodes in Pa(vi ) that are not on the
path P(l, vi ). There are three cases.
1) When b = 1 and c = 1, the relationship vi → v j with a
common latent confounder belongs to Structure 3. The residual
ri ( j) is calculated as the following equation:
ri ( j)
X
=
(f
ai,l − s af
f
f
e3
j,i a
i,l − s a
j,l )xl + (1 − s af
j,i )n
l∈L

+

X

X

l∈L h∈H (P(l,vi ))

X

+

(af
e1
i,h − s af
j,i af
i,h )x h + (1 − s af
j,i )n i − s n

(ai, p − s af
j,i ai, p )x p − s

p∈Pa ′ (vi )

−s

X
h∈H (P(vi ,v j ))

ag
j,h x h − s

X

X
p∈Pa ′ (v j )

a j, p x p − s ne2

X

l∈L h∈H (P(l,v j )\vi )

h∈H (P(vi ,v j ))

ag
j,h x h − s

ag
j,h x h − sn j

(7)



where s = (cov xi , x j /var x j ). If cov xi , x j = 0, the
coefficient of ne3 on ri ( j) is nonzero. Thus, ri ( j) is dependent
of x j according to Theorem 1. If cov xi , x j ̸ = 0, both ne1

X

a j, p x p − sn j . (8)

p∈Pa ′ (v j )

If cov(xi , x j ) = 0, the coefficient of nei on ri ( j) is nonzero.
When cov(xi , x j ) ̸ = 0, ne1 on ri ( j) is nonzero. Therefore, in this
situation, ri ( j) is still dependent of x j due to Theorem 1.
3) When b = 0 and c = 1, vi and v j are only affected by
confounders, belonging to Structure 2. The following is the
calculation of the residual ri ( j) :
X
X
X
ri ( j) =
(f
ai,l − s af
af
e3
i,l )xl +
i,h x h + n
l∈L h∈H (P(l,vi ))

l∈L

X

+

ai, p x p + n i − s

X

X

a j, p x p

p∈Pa ′ (v j )

X

l∈L h∈H (P(l,v j )\vi )

p∈Pa ′ (v j )

l∈L

X

−s

−s

ag
e2 
j,h x h + n

a j, p x p + n j

p∈Pa ′ (vi )

p∈Pa ′ (vi )


X

and ne2 have nonzero coefficients on ri ( j) , showing that the
dependence remains.
2) When b = 1 and c = 0, the relationship vi → v j without
any confounders belongs to Structure 1. The residual ri ( j) is
calculated as the following equation:
X
(ai, p − s af
e1
ri ( j) =
j,i ai, p )x p + (1 − s af
j,i )n i − s n

ag
e2 − sn j .
j,h x h − s n

(9)


If cov xi , x j ̸ = 0, the coefficient of ne2 for s = ri ( j) is
nonzero. The finite-time linear combination of non-Gaussian
data xl still
meets the non-Gaussian distribution. When

cov xi , x j = 0, the coefficient of xl is nonzero.
In summary, x j ∈ x j and ri ( j) ∈ ri ( j ) are dependent in all
cases, which contradicts what is known. Hence, Proposition 1
is proven.
□
The HSCI method is retained for the CI test in Proposition 1.
The significance parameter for the CI test in Proposition 1 is
labeled as sig2 .
2) Proposition 2: Proposition 1 determines whether the
structure between vi and v j is Structure 1. Furthermore,
Proposition 2 shows that the matrix B̃ ′ can distinguish between
Structure 2 and Structure 3. The matrix B̃ ′ originates from [27]
and fundamentally acts as an approximation of matrix B.
The matrix B is described in (3). The element of matrix B,
as discussed in [27], shows whether a causal path is present
between the related variables. Thus, we can determine whether
the causal path exists by using B̃ ′ instead of B. In our work,
we employ the RICA algorithm to calculate B̃ ′ , setting the
sampling parameter r to ensure result reliability [30]. The
lemma in [27] gives the necessary and sufficient condition
for causal path existence between variables.
Lemma 1 [27]: Given the faithfulness assumption, there is
a causal path from the observed variable vi to v j if and only
if the corresponding two-row vectors B̃ ′ i,: and B̃ ′ j,: in the
matrix B̃ ′ satisfy n 0∗ > 0 and n ∗0 = 0, where n 0∗ means the
number of columns in [ B̃ ′ i,: , B̃ ′ j,: ] whose first element is zero
and the second is nonzero, and n ∗0 is the number of columns
in [ B̃ ′ i,: , B̃ ′ j,: ] whose first element is nonzero and the second
is zero.
With Lemma 1 as a basis, we derive Proposition 2, which
distinguishes Structure 2 from Structure 3 and identifies the
causal direction.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LiNGAM-SF: CAUSAL STRUCTURAL LEARNING METHOD

Proposition 2: Given the faithfulness assumption, if two
variables (vi , v j ) at the edge G t ′ are affected by the confounders, then the matrix B̃ ′ can distinguish whether their
structure is Structure 2 or Structure 3.
Proof: If the two variables vi and v j in (vi , v j ) ∈ U are
affected by the confounders, it can be known from Property 1
that the two variables can only be Structure 2 or Structure 3.
If two-row vectors B̃ ′ i,: and B̃ ′ j,: in the matrix B̃ ′ satisfy
n 0∗ > 0 and n ∗0 = 0, it implies the presence of a causal path
between two variables according to the Lemma 1. Therefore,
the structure of the two variables belongs to Structure 3,
in which there is a causal path between the two variables.
Conversely, it belongs to Structure 2, in which there is no
causal path between the two variables. In conclusion, the
matrix B̃ ′ can distinguish between the two structures.
□
To facilitate a clear understanding of the Matrix B̃ ′ and
Proposition 2, we present the following examples.
Example 1: We apply the ICDPLV to the data generated
according to Fig. 1(b). All the examples in the subsequent text
adopt the same data. When t = 1, the LiNGAM-SF method
constructs the skeleton structure G ′1 shown in Fig. 2 for the
arrived variables v1 , v2 , and v3 . The ICDPLV needs to perform
operations on the three edges (v1 , v2 ), (v2 , v3 ), and (v1 , v3 ).
It can be known from Proposition 1 that r1 (3) and r2 (3) are
independent of x3 respectively. Therefore, the directed edges
⟨v3 , v1 ⟩ and ⟨v3 , v2 ⟩ are determined. For the undirected edge
(v1 , v2 ), it does not satisfy the conditions of Proposition 1,
indicating that v1 and v2 are affected by confounders. The two
vectors obtained by the RICA technique are given as follows:

 

0.1036
1
0 1
≈
.
(10)
1
0.1307
1 0
According to Proposition 2, the relationship between v1 and
v2 is Structure 2. Therefore, when t = 1, the causal graph
output by ICDPLV is G 1 in Fig. 2.
Example 2: When new variables {v4 , v5 , v8 } arrive, the
structure of G 1 is updated to G ′2 in Fig. 2. We execute the
ICDPLV on G ′2 . For the undirected edge (v4 , v5 ) on G ′2 ,
Proposition 1 detects that it is affected by the confounders and
marks it as [v4 , v5 ]. The RICA gives the vector of {v4 , v5 } as
follows:

 

0.2528 0.8588
0 1
≈
.
(11)
0.8006 0.7916
1 1
The two row vectors fulfill the conditions: n 0∗ > 0 and
n ∗0 = 0. Hence, the relationship between v4 and v5 belongs to
Structure 2. The undirected edge (v4 , v5 ) is updated to ⟨v4 , v5 ⟩.
3) ICDPLV Subalgorithm: This article proposes the ICDPLV subalgorithm based on the above two propositions.
For the set of undirected edges, the ICDPLV first identifies
Structure 1 by Proposition 1, and the causal direction between
the variables can be identified (lines 3–11 in Algorithm 2).
Next, Proposition 2 is employed to distinguish between
Structure 2 and Structure 3, thereby providing the causal
direction between variables (lines 12–19 in Algorithm 2).
In Structure 2 and Structure 3, the latent confounders are
unobservable and unknown. However, their existence can be
detected, and they are saved in L alter (line 9 in Algorithm 2).
The details of the ICDPLV subalgorithm are demonstrated in
Algorithm 2.

10699

Algorithm 2 ICDPLV Subalgorithm
Input: The local directed graph G ′t ; The observed data X o ;
The sampling rate r ; The significant coefficients sig2
Output: The causal structure G t ; The candidate set of latent
confounders L alter ;
1: Initial T ← ∅, G t ← ∅ and L alter ← ∅;
2: Find a set U of undirected edges from G ′t ;
3: for all ei = (vm , vn ) ∈ U do
4:
Identify the direction via Proposition1 with sig2
5:
if vm −→ vn or vn −→ vm then
6:
Update (vm , vn ) on G ′t ;
7:
else
8:
T ← T ∪ (vm , vn )
9:
L alter ← L alter ∪ [vm , vn ]
10:
end if
11: end for
12: for all ei = (vm , vn ) ∈ T do
13:
Distinguish the structures via Proposition2 with r
14:
if vm −→ vn or vn −→ vm then
15:
Update (vm , vn ) on G ′t
16:
else
17:
Delete undirected edge (vm , vn ) on G ′t
18:
end if
19: end for
20: G t ← G t ′
21: return G t , L alter ;

Fig. 5. Possible cases in the candidate set of latent confounders. (a) Observed
confounders and latent confounders. (b) Common latent confounder influencing multiple variables.

E. DLCs Algorithm
The latent confounders L alter detected by the ICDPLV subalgorithm cannot be taken as the final outcome. The reasons are
given as follows. First, as shown in Fig. 5(a), the ICDPLV finds
that variables v1 and v2 are affected by latent confounders.
The ICDPLV regards the observed variable v3 as a latent
confounder because it only analyzes the relationship between
two variables on an undirected edge each time. It leads to
a situation where the latent confounder detected is just the
observed variable v3 in G t , potentially along with other latent
confounders such as l1 . The situation is regular in SF scenarios,
where the variable that is a latent confounder at the time t
may become an observable variable at the time t + 1. Second,
as shown in Fig. 5(b), the ICDPLV detects the presence of
a confounder on the variables v1 and v5 , as well as on the
variables v4 and v5 . However, v1 , v5 , and v6 might be affected
by a common latent confounder l1 .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10700

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

TABLE II
S TATISTICAL R ESULTS

For the case of Fig. 5(a), a solution has been given in the
literature [13]. It proves theoretically that the residuals ri ( j )
of the variable vi can be used as a new input to eliminate the
influence of observed confounder v j . Therefore, the observed
data of the variables xi are replaced by the residuals ri ( j ) .
After removing the effect of the confounder, Proposition 1
in Section III-D will again be used to judge whether the
relationship between two variables is Structure 1 unaffected by
the confounders. If they belong to structure 1, the suspicious
element will be eliminated from the candidate set. Otherwise,
it will be retained.
Example 3: When t = 1, the ICDPLV outputs L alter =
[v1 , v2 ] in Fig. 2. We can observe that variables v1 and v2 have
a common ancestor v3 in G 1 . Therefore, the DLC needs to
eliminate the influence of v3 . The data of v1 and v2 are updated
to r1 (3) and r2 (3) , respectively. Proposition 1 makes another
judgment on the new data of v1 and v2 . Since their new data
are still related to their residuals, the variables v1 and v2 are
still affected by the latent confounders.
The DLC subalgorithm needs to detect the common confounder, as shown in Fig. 5(b), but the task is challenging.
We analyze the structure with the common confounder,
as shown in Fig. 5(b). With Vcom = {v1 , v2 , . . . , v p } sharing a
common confounder l, the structure exhibits Property 2.
Property 2: For the structure with the common confounder,
the algorithm will output ( p( p − 1)/2) confounders of the
same form as vi ← lk → v j , where vi , v j ∈ {v1 , v2 , . . . , v p }
and i ̸ = j. The latent confounder is denoted as lk , k =
1, 2, . . . , ( p( p − 1)/2).
Proof: Any two features vi , v j ∈ {v1 , v2 , . . . , v p } are not
directly causal, so vi ⊥
⊥ v j |l. However, l is a latent variable,
and then, vi and v j satisfy ¬∃s ⊆ Vt − {vi , v j } s.t.(vi ⊥
⊥ v j |s). Therefore, the method in Section III-C will create an
undirected edge for vi and v j . Since any two of the p variables
can form such an edge, ( p( p − 1)/2) undirected edges are
provided for the ICDPLV to judge. In fact, the common
confounder causes ICDPLV to output ( p( p − 1)/2) candidate
latent confounders with the same form as vi ← lk → v j . □
According to Property 2, the DLC gives an acceptable
solution to detect the common latent confounders. Suppose
that there are p variables in the candidate set L alter , which
do not have any causal relationship with each other and
satisfy Property 2. In that case, the DLC will consider the
p variables as having the same confounders. The p variables
with ( p( p−1)/2) different confounders also satisfy Property 2.
Later, we call this type of structure a fully connected structure
for short. However, there are too few fully connected structures
in the real causal structure. The statistical results are given in
Table II to verify the point. Therefore, the DLC can give an
acceptable result in detecting the common latent confounders.
The details of the DLC subalgorithm are shown in
Algorithm 3. The main purpose of the DLC subalgorithm
is to detect the latent confounders from the candidate set

given by the ICDPLV. The DLC first removes the effect
of confounders from the observed variables by residuals
(lines 2–17 in Algorithm 3) and then detects the common
confounders based on Property 2 (lines 18–21 in Algorithm 3).
Finally, the DLC outputs the detected latent confounders.
Algorithm 3 DLC Subalgorithm
Input: The causal structure G; The candidate set of latent
confounders L alter ; The observed data X o ; The latent
confounders L t−1 output at the time t − 1
Output: The set of latent confounders L t ;
1: Initial LC ← ∅ and L t ← ∅
2: [v1 , v2 , . . . , vn ] ∈ L t−1 are split into ( p( p − 1)/2) confounders
3: L alter ← L alter ∪ L t−1
4: for each vi , v j in L alter do
5:
Find observed confounders lk of vi and v j in G
6:
LC(vi ) ← LC(vi )∪ lk
7:
LC v j ← LC v j ∪ lk
8: end for
9: T ←all feature variables t in LC
10: for each t in T do
11:
Compute the residual r on LC(t)
12:
X o (:, t) ← r ;
13: end for

14: for each vi , v j in L alter do
15:
if Check vi and v j are not influenced by latent confounders based on Proposition
1 then

16:
L alter ← L alter − vi , v j
17:
end if
18: end for
19: if The set Vcom that
 satisfies Property 2 then
20:
Delete vi , v j in L alter , vi , v j ∈ Vcom
21:
L t ← L t ∪ [v1 , v2 , . . . , vn ]
22: end if
23: L t ← L t ∪ L alter
24: return L t ;
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Preparation
We conduct the experiments with a standard PC on
MATLAB R2018b. It is important to note that the experiments
utilized all observational data without partitioning it into training and testing sets. The approach to evaluation is to compare
the learned results with the ground truth (real structure).
1) Dataset: 1) The synthetic data are generated based on
real causal structures derived from the Bayesian Network
Repository1 and randomly generated networks. Table III summarizes these structures. To satisfy linear non-Gaussianity,
data is generated following (1). The causal intensity A ranges
over [−1, 0) ∪ (0, 1], and the noise N is uniformly distributed
over (−1, 1), ensuring independence and non-Gaussianity.
Each structure has 1000 data samples.
2) The real data are from the Yahoo Finance database.2
We obtain daily closing prices from August 30, 2013, to
1 Bayesian
2 Yahoo

network repository: https://www.bnlearn.com/bnrepository/.
finance database: https://help.yahoo.com/kb/sln2311.html.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LiNGAM-SF: CAUSAL STRUCTURAL LEARNING METHOD

10701

Fig. 6. Parameter sensitivity analysis. (a) Precision results for three parameters under different values. (b) Recall results for three parameters under different
values. (c) F1 value results for three parameters under different values.

TABLE III
D ETAILED I NFORMATION OF THE C AUSAL S TRUCTURE

August 29, 2023, for three index funds: U.S. Dow Jones
Industrial (DJI) Average, Japanese Nikkei 225 (N225), and
Hong Kong Hang Seng Index (HSI). Following the data
preprocessing methodology from [27], let c(t) denote the
closing price on day t. The return R(t) is defined as: (c(t) −
c(t − 1)/c(t − 1)). We utilize index returns as feature variables
to investigate the causal relationships between indices. The
preprocessed dataset consists of 2153 samples with three
features.
2) Comparison Methods: The CSBS [9], the CSSU [10],
and the PRCDSF [12] are current CSLSF methods for linear
relationships, so they are chosen as comparison methods.
To validate the advantages of partitioning the data into SFs,
the one-time learning methods such as L-MARVEL [21],
M3 HC [23], and ParceLiNGAM [25] are also employed as
comparison methods.
3) Evaluation Metrics: The comparison metrics of the
methods contain three items: precision P, recall R, and
F1 value. The precision is the percentage of correct causal
relationships among learned causal relationships between two
observed feature variables. The recall calculates the percentage
of correct causal relationships among true causal relationships
between two observed feature variables. The F1 value is
calculated as 2 × P × R/(P + R).
B. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
There are three parameters for the LiNGAM-SF method.
They are the sampling rate r and two significant coefficients,

Fig. 7.

Three comparison metrics on ALARM under SFs.

Fig. 8.

Three comparison metrics on HEPAR2 under SFs.

sig1 and sig2 . The performance of the method in terms of
the precision, recall, and F1 value is observed by letting r
vary from 0 to 1 with a step size of 0.1 and letting sig1 and
sig2 vary from 0.001 to 0.1 with a step size of 0.011. The
parameter sensitivity is analyzed on the structures: CHILD,
HAILFINDER, MILDEW, and PATHFINDER. The precision,
recall, and F1 values in Fig. 6 are the average values obtained
on the four structures.
Fig. 6(a) indicates that the smaller the sig1 , the higher the
precision. Fig. 6(b) reveals that the smaller the sig2 , the higher
the recall rate. In Fig. 6(b), when r = 0.7 and sig2 = 0.001,
the recall rate can reach above 0.66. In summary, the three
parameters in the experiments are set as r = 0.7, sig1 = 0.001,
and sig2 = 0.001, respectively.
C. Comparative Experiments
1) Synthetic Data:
a) Streaming features: To simulate the scenario of SFs,
the data are partitioned into batches based on feature variables
and then fed into all methods in batches. Each batch randomly
includes k features, with k respectively assigned as 2, 5, 5,
10, and 10 for five sizes of causal structures: small, medium,
large, very large, and massive. The results are averaged over
ten experimental runs, with data regenerated for each run to
meet the dataset requirements described in Section IV-A.
Figs. 7–10 present the precision, recall, and F1 values across
different time points for the ALARM, HEPAR2, PIGS, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10702

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON E XPERIMENTS ON THE C OMPLETE DATA —PART A

Fig. 9.

Three comparison metrics on PIGS under SFs.

Fig. 11.

Fig. 10.

Three comparison metrics on MUNIN under SFs.

MUNIN structures under SFs. Our method, represented by
the red line, demonstrates consistently superior performance
in terms of precision and F1 values throughout the entire
temporal phase compared to all baseline methods.
The comparison algorithms M3 HC, ParceLiNGAM, and
L-MARVEL are representatives of causal structure methods
with latent variables. The ParceLiNGAM fails to generate
results within the 2-h time limit when the number of feature variables exceeds 70. Similarly, M3 HC and L-MARVEL
exceed this computational threshold when feature variables
exceed 700. The limitation of their one-time learning prevents
them from coping with the incremental features.
b) Complete data: Tables IV and V summarize the
performance metrics for complete data across 15 structures,
with “-” indicating a 2-h timeout. Compared to the best
baseline, our method achieves 11% higher precision on aver-

Analysis on error results.

age. The performance gap widens for high-dimensional cases
(>1000 variables), where our F1 values exceed state-of-the-art
results by 59% on average. Compared to other methods, ParceLiNGAM achieves the highest recall on SACHS,
BARLEY, INSURANCE, and WATER structures. However,
it lacks the capability to learn causal structures in highdimensional data. In higher dimensional cases, both M3 HC and
L-MARVEL face similar challenges. Therefore, we suggest
dividing high-dimensional complete data into SFs, employing
the batch-learning method to learn causal structure.
The CSBS, CSSU, PRCDSF, and M3 HC methods rely on
scoring to identify directions, but, as noted in Section I, this
approach is unreliable. Taking the DIABETES structure as an
example, these methods produce excess and reversed edges,
resulting in poor outcomes (see Fig. 11). In contrast, the
L-MARVEL method, which uses d-separation to identify
causal directions, cannot distinguish Markov equivalence
classes, leading to numerous undirected edges, as shown in
Fig. 11. As shown in Fig. 12, LiNGAM-SF achieved over 90%
precision in learning undirected edges, closely approximating
the final outcomes. The ability to precisely learn causal

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LiNGAM-SF: CAUSAL STRUCTURAL LEARNING METHOD

10703

TABLE V
C OMPARISON E XPERIMENTS ON THE C OMPLETE DATA —PART B

in the financial industry. Moreover, when t = 3, only the
proposed method gives the same results as in the literature [27]
and [31].

Fig. 12.

Results on the precision of the learned undirected edges.

structures through causal identifiability is a key factor in the
method’s success.
The time efficiency of each method is recorded in
Tables IV and V. Although our method shows little time
advantage with fewer features, it becomes more efficient as
feature numbers grow, reusing prior regression results rather
than recalculating. This allows it to outperform other comparison methods. With hundreds of features, it ranks third in time
usage but yields the most precise causal structure, making the
time tradeoff worthwhile.
2) Real Data: For real data, the return values of three
indices funds HSI, N225, and DJI are observed respectively at
the time t = 1, 2, 3. The output of each method at each time
is shown in Fig. 13. The existing CSLSF method establishes a
causal relationship for indices HIS and N225 when t = 2, but
its correctness is yet to be proven. In contrast, the proposed
method finds that there is a latent confounder for the two
indices. The conclusion is explainable because the index DJI
affects indices N255 and HIS. The conclusion is a consensus

D. Latent Confounders Detection for SFs
1) Synthetic Data: For synthetic data, this section employs
four cases to illustrate that the LiNGAM-SF method can detect
latent confounders.
Case 1: For the structure WIN95PTS, the variable Problem6
is assumed to be observed at the time t = 1. Next, two feature
variables GrbldPS and AvlblVrtlMmry are observed at the time
t = 2. The real causal structure is shown in Fig. 14(a).
When the variables GrbldPS and AvlblVrtlMmry are
observable,
the
ICDPLV
outputs
the
structure
AvlblVrtlMmry→ GrbldPS→Problem6 for three variables.
Meanwhile, it provides the candidate set of latent confounders
[Problem6, GrbldPS]. Since Problem6 and GrbldPS do not
share a common confounder in the structure and do not
satisfy Property 2, [Problem6, GrbldPS] is the output of the
DLC. In all figures of this section, the latent confounders are
consistently denoted as L.
Case 2: For the structure BARLEY, it is assumed that the
two variables exptgens and forfrugt are observed at the time
t = 1. Then, potnmin is observed at the time t = 2. The real
structure is shown in Fig. 15(a).
At the time t = 1, the LiNGAM-SF method outputs the
causal structure forfrugt→potnmin. After observing the feature
variable potnmin, the ICDPLV updates the causal structure to
potnmin← forfrugt →potnmin and outputs the candidate set
[potnmin,exptgens]. Unlike Case 1, potnmin and exptgens have
an observed confounder forfrugt. Therefore, the DLC needs to
remove the effect of the confounder forfrugt and then judge
whether potnmin and exptgens are still under the influence of
the latent confounder through Proposition 1. Eventually, the
algorithm detects that potnmin and exptgens are still affected

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10704

Fig. 13.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

Results on the real data.

Fig. 14. Latent confounder detection is performed on Case 1. (a) Real
Structural. (b) t = 1. (c) t = 2 after step 1. (d) t = 2 after step 2. (e) t = 2 after
step 3.

by the latent confounder L except for the influence of forfrugt,
as shown in Fig. 15.
Case 3: For the structure WATER, it is assumed that two
variables C_NI_12_00 and CBODD_12_15 are observed when
t = 1. Subsequently, CKND_12_15 and CKNN_12_15 are
observed when t = 2. The real structure is shown in Fig. 16(a).
The LiNGAM-SF method outputs the causal structure C_NI_12_00→CBODD_12_15 at the time t = 1.
After observing the feature variables CKND_12_15 and
CKNN_12_15, the LiNGAM-SF first learns two undirected
edges: (CKNN_12_15, CKND_12_15) and (CKND_12_15,
CBODD_12_15). Then, the ICDPLV subalgorithm outputs the candidate sets [CKNN_12_15, CKND_12_15] and
[CKND_12_15, CBODD_12_15]. It states that the latent
confounders cause the two undirected edges to be generated. Thus, observed feature variables CKNN_12_15 and
CKND_12_15 are isolated nodes, while the causal structure C_NI_12_00→CBODD_12_15 is retained anyhow. Since
the three feature variables CKNN_12_15, CKND_12_15, and
CBODD_12_15 in the candidate sets do not satisfy Property 2,
the DLC subalgorithm finally concludes that they do not have
the common latent confounder. Two latent confounders L 1 and
L 2 are detected, as illustrated in Fig. 16(e).
Case 4: For the structure HEPAR2, it is assumed that
two feature variables amylase and fat are observed at the time
t = 1. Next, upper_pain is observed when t = 2. The real
structure is shown in Fig. 17(a).
When t = 1, the LiNGAM-SF successfully detects a latent
confounder [amylase, fat] between amylase and fat. With the

Fig. 15. Latent confounder detection is performed on Case 2. (a) Real
Structural. (b) t = 1. (c) t = 2 after step 1. (d) t = 2 after step 2. (e) t = 2 after
step 3.

Fig. 16. Latent confounder detection is performed on Case 3. (a) Real
Structural. (b) t = 1. (c) t = 2 after step 1. (d) t = 2 after step 2. (e) t = 2 after
step 3.

variable upper_pain observed when t = 2, the undirected
edges (upper_pain, amylase) and (upper_pain, fat) are formed.
Since the ICDPLV finds that they belong to Structure 2, the
candidate set contains [upper_pain, amylase], [upper_pain,
fat], and [amylase, fat] output at the time t = 1. They are
fed into the DLC for further identification. The variables in
the candidate set do not have an observed confounder and
conform to property 2. Thus, amylase, fat, and upper_pain
have the common latent confounder L, as shown in Fig. 17(e).
2) Real Data: For real financial data, this section assumes
that three indices funds HIS, N225, and DJI enter the observation in turn. The LiNGAM-SF method gives the latent
confounder detection results for each time, as shown in Fig. 18.
When t = 1, only one variable HIS is observed, and the
proposed method cannot give more information. As the N225

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LiNGAM-SF: CAUSAL STRUCTURAL LEARNING METHOD

10705

TABLE VI
A BLATION E XPERIMENT W ITH T WO P ROPOSITIONS

increase or remain constant, regardless of the LiNGAMSF_Del2’s correctness.
In summary, Proposition 1 is concerned with the precision, while Proposition 2 focuses on the recall. Therefore,
Propositions 1 and 2 of the ICDPLV are indispensable.

Fig. 17. Latent confounder detection is performed on Case 4. (a) Real
Structural. (b) t = 1. (c) t = 2 after step 1. (d) t = 2 after step 2. (e) t = 2 after
step 3.

Fig. 18.

V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we investigate linear non-Gaussian data and
propose the LiNGAM-SF method for SFs to learn a precise
causal structure and detect latent confounders. The proposed
method designs the ICDPLV subalgorithm to precisely identify
the direction of the observed variables and output a candidate
set of latent confounders. In addition, the proposed method
provides the DLC subalgorithm based on Property 2 to further
detect the latent confounders.
Although the method demonstrates significant advantages
under SFs, future research should focus on boosting efficiency
by refining CI testing and implementing distributed deployment. In addition, domain transfer can be used to enhance
generalization, with causal structures from one source guiding
the learning of SFs in different domains.

Latent confounder detection is performed on real data.

R EFERENCES
index is observed, the LiNGAM-SF detects the existence of
a latent confounder. The DJI index confirms the plausibility
of the latent confounder when t = 3. The proposed method
finds that the latent confounder is still present when t = 3.
In addition, the latent confounder L is common to all three
indices. In reality, it could be an event or a policy that can
cause a common change in DJI, HIS, and N225 indexes. The
situation is consistent with the perception of financial markets.
E. Ablation Experiment
The ICDPLV subalgorithm applies Propositions 1 and 2
to differentiate between the three structures and identify
causal directions. To assess the impact of these propositions, we conduct ablation experiments, removing components
based on Proposition 1 (LiNGAM-SF_Del1) and Proposition 2
(LiNGAM-SF_Del2). Table VI presents the results when all
feature variables are observed.
The results of the LiNGAM-SF_Del1 method reveal the
importance of Proposition 1. The LiNGAM-SF_Del1 that
does not use Proposition 1 to learn the structures declined
at precision, recall, and F1 values.
LiNGAM-SF_Del2 shows that excluding Proposition 2 significantly reduces recall while barely improving precision.
Proposition 2 takes a further step on the result of Proposition 1
to distinguish between structures. The recall rate will either

[1] R. Cai, W. Chen, K. Zhang, and Z. Hao, “A survey on non-temporal
series observational data based causal discovery,” Chin. J. Comput.,
vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1470–1490, 2017.
[2] C. Glymour, K. Zhang, and P. Spirtes, “Review of causal discovery
methods based on graphical models,” Frontiers Genet., vol. 10, p. 524,
Jun. 2019.
[3] R. Guo, L. Cheng, J. Li, P. R. Hahn, and H. Liu, “A survey of
learning causality with data: Problems and methods,” ACM Comput.
Surv., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1–37, Jul. 2021.
[4] X. Jia, B. Kuo, and M. M. Crawford, “Feature mining for hyperspectral image classification,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 101, no. 3, pp. 676–697,
Mar. 2013.
[5] W. Pan, L. Chen, and Z. Ming, “Personalized recommendation with
implicit feedback via learning pairwise preferences over item-sets,”
Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 295–318, Feb. 2019.
[6] J. Yang, Z. Wang, G. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. He, and D. Wu, “Osfs-vague:
Online streaming feature selection algorithm based on vague set,” CAAI
Trans. Intell. Technol., vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 1–16, 2024.
[7] X. Wu, K. Yu, W. Ding, H. Wang, and X. Zhu, “Online feature selection
with streaming features,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 1178–1192, May 2013.
[8] K. Yu, X. Wu, W. Ding, and H. Wang, “Exploring causal relationships
with streaming features,” Comput. J., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 1103–1117,
Sep. 2012.
[9] X. Guo and J. Yang, “Causal structure learning algorithm based on
streaming features,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Knowl. (ICBK),
Aug. 2017, pp. 192–197.
[10] J. Yang, X. Guo, N. An, A. Wang, and K. Yu, “Streaming feature-based
causal structure learning algorithm with symmetrical uncertainty,” Inf.
Sci., vol. 467, pp. 708–724, Oct. 2018.
[11] J. Yang, G. Fan, A. Shen, and A. Wang, “Causal structure learning of
nonlinear additive noise model based on streaming feature,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW), Dec. 2021, pp. 490–499.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10706

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

[12] J. Yang, L. Jiang, A. Shen, and A. Wang, “Online streaming features
causal discovery algorithm based on partial rank correlation,” IEEE
Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 197–208, Feb. 2023.
[13] S. Shimizu et al., “DirectLiNGAM: A direct method for learning a linear
non-Gaussian structural equation model,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 12,
pp. 1225–1248, Apr. 2011.
[14] P. O. Hoyer, S. Shimizu, A. J. Kerminen, and M. Palviainen, “Estimation
of causal effects using linear non-Gaussian causal models with hidden
variables,” Int. J. Approx. Reasoning, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 362–378,
Oct. 2008.
[15] S. Shimizu, P. O. Hoyer, A. Hyvärinen, and A. J. Kerminen, “A linear
non-Gaussian acyclic model for causal discovery,” J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
vol. 7, pp. 2003–2030, Oct. 2006.
[16] J. Liang, J. Wang, G. Yu, W. Guo, C. Domeniconi, and M. Guo,
“Directed acyclic graph learning on attributed heterogeneous network,”
in IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 10845–10856,
Oct. 2023.
[17] Z. Fang, S. Zhu, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Chen, and Y. He, “On lowrank directed acyclic graphs and causal structure learning,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4924–4937, Apr. 2024.
[18] P. Spirtes, C. N. Glymour, and R. Scheines, Causation, Prediction, and
Search. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2000.
[19] T. Richardson, “A discovery algorithm for directed cyclic graphs,” in
Proc. 12th Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., 1996, pp. 451–461.
[20] J. Pellet and A. Elisseeff, “Finding latent causes in causal networks: An
efficient approach based on Markov blankets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 21, 2008, pp. 10119–10130.
[21] S. Akbari, E. Mokhtarian, A. Ghassami, and N. Kiyavash, “Recursive causal structure learning in the presence of latent variables and
selection bias,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021,
pp. 10119–10130.
[22] S. Triantafillou and I. Tsamardinos, “Score-based vs constraintbased causal learning in the presence of confounders,” in
Proc. 32nd Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell.–Workshops, 2016,
pp. 59–67.
[23] K. Tsirlis, V. Lagani, S. Triantafillou, and I. Tsamardinos, “On
scoring maximal ancestral graphs with the max–min Hill climbing algorithm,” Int. J. Approx. Reasoning, vol. 102, pp. 74–85,
Nov. 2018.
[24] A. Bellot and M. van der Schaar, “Linear deconfounded score method:
Scoring DAGs with dense unobserved confounding,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4948–4962, Apr. 2024.
[25] T. Tashiro, S. Shimizu, A. Hyvärinen, and T. Washio, “ParceLiNGAM:
A causal ordering method robust against latent confounders,” Neural
Comput., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 57–83, Jan. 2014.
[26] W. Chen, R. Cai, K. Zhang, and Z. Hao, “Causal discovery in linear
non-Gaussian acyclic model with multiple latent confounders,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 2816–2827,
Jul. 2022.
[27] S. Salehkaleybar, A. Ghassami, N. Kiyavash, and K. Zhang, “Learning
linear non-Gaussian causal models in the presence of latent variables,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 39, pp. 1–24, 2020.
[28] D. You et al., “Continuous causal structure learning from incremental instances and feature spaces,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 101, Jan. 2024,
Art. no. 101975.
[29] A. Gretton, R. Herbrich, A. Smola, O. Bousquet, and B. Schölkopf,
“Kernel methods for measuring Independence,” J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
vol. 6, pp. 2075–2129, Dec. 2005.
[30] Q. V. Le, A. Karpenko, J. Ngiam, and A. Y. Ng, “ICA with reconstruction cost for efficient overcomplete feature learning,” in Proc. 24th Int.
Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 24, 2011, pp. 1017–1025.
[31] A. Hyvärinen, K. Zhang, S. Shimizu, and P. O. Hoyer, “Estimation of a structural vector autoregression model using nonGaussianity,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 1709–1731,
2010.

Chenglin Zhang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in computer science and technology from Chongqing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China,
in 2015 and 2018, respectively, where he is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree with a focus on research
in causal learning and granular computing.

Hong Yu (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree
in physics from Nanchang Hangkong University,
Nanchang, China, in 1994, the M.S. degree in signal
and information processing from Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing,
China, in 1997, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
software and theory from Chongqing University,
Chongqing, in 2003.
Since 2013, she has been a Full Professor at
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications. From 2007 to 2008, she was a Visiting Scholar
at the University of Regina, Regina, SK, Canada. She is the author of three
books and more than 100 articles. Her research interests include rough sets,
industrial big data, data mining, knowledge discovery, granular computing,
three-way clustering, and machine learning.
Dr. Yu was one of the first prize winners of a Chongqing Natural Science
and Technology Award in 2019. Her article was selected as one of the Top
Articles in the Outstanding S&T Journal of China.
Guoyin Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.E. degree in computer software, the M.S.
degree in computer software, and the Ph.D. degree in
computer organization and architecture from Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1992, 1994,
and 1996, respectively.
He was at the University of North Texas, Denton,
TX, USA, and the University of Regina, Regina, SK,
Canada, as a Visiting Scholar from 1998 to 1999.
Since 1996, he has been at Chongqing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China,
where he is currently a Professor, the Director of Chongqing Key Laboratory
of Computational Intelligence, and the Vice-President of the University. He is
the author of more than ten books and more than 300 articles. His research
interests include rough sets, granular computing, knowledge technology, data
mining, neural networks, and cognitive computing.
Dr. Wang was the President of the International Rough Set Society (IRSS)
from 2014 to 2017. He is the Vice-President of Chinese Association for
Artificial Intelligence (CAAI) and a Council Member of China Computer
Federation (CCF).
Yongfang Xie (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in control science and engineering from Central South University,
Changsha, China, in 1993, 1996, and 1999, respectively.
From 1999 to 2003, he was with Tokyo International Information Science Research Institute,
Tokyo, Japan, and a Visiting Scholar with the PToPA
Research Institute, Tokyo. He is currently a Full Professor with the School of Information Science and
Engineering, Central South University. His current
research interests include modeling, optimization, and control of complicated
industrial processes, distributed robust control, and fault diagnoses.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 11:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

