IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

1065

TraceCluster: A Lightweight and Adaptive
Clustering-Based Subgraph Attention Network for
APT Detection in Provenance Graphs
Lijuan Xu , Zicheng Zhao , Dawei Zhao , Zhen Wang , Fellow, IEEE, and Chunpeng Ge
Abstract—Provenance graph-based anomaly detection, particularly for Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) detection, addresses
the issues of large-scale graphs and data imbalance. However,
existing methods struggle with information loss, high computational complexity, and low detection accuracy. To address the
above challenges, this paper proposes TraceCluster, a lightweight
and adaptive clustering-based Subgraph Attention Network
(SAN) for APT detection in provenance graph. TraceCluster mitigates the neighborhood explosion problem by clustering nodes
to partition large-scale graphs, thus reducing reliance on the
global graph while preserving local neighborhood information.
Furthermore, the method dynamically models complex internode dependencies within subgraphs. It employs an attention
mechanism to adaptively highlight the most relevant connections.
This enhances node representations and improves overall feature
extraction. This design substantially reduces memory consumption and avoids the high computational complexity of global
graph processing. In addition, an adaptive category-weighting
loss function assigns variable weights to different classes, improving the detection of rare and anomalous behaviors. Experimental
results show that on the OpTC dataset, the currently faster
method is 37-fold and 3-fold slower than our approach in
terms of inference time respectively. Furthermore, in the nine
real-world scenarios of four evaluated datasets, TraceCluster
outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) approaches in terms of
overall performance, especially in node-level APT detection tasks.
Received 26 April 2025; revised 12 November 2025 and 5 January 2026;
accepted 7 January 2026. Date of publication 12 January 2026; date of current
version 21 January 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Key
Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2023YFB3107300;
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62172244 and Grant 62572285; in part by Shandong Provincial Natural
Science Foundation under Grant ZR2024MF050; in part by Taishan Scholars
Program under Grant tsqn202211210; in part by the Key Research and
Development Program of Shandong under Grant 2025CXPT082; in part by
the “20 New Universities” Project of Jinan City under Grant 202333023 and
Grant 202333045; and in part by the Pairing Plan Project of the School
of Computer Science and Technology, Qilu University of Technology under
Grant 2024JDJH12. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article
and approving it for publication was Dr. Fabio De Gaspari. (Corresponding
author: Dawei Zhao.)
Lijuan Xu, Zicheng Zhao, and Dawei Zhao are with the Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry of
Education, Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer
Center in Jinan), Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of
Sciences), Jinan 250353, China, and also with Shandong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Industrial Network and Information System Security, Shandong
Fundamental Research Center for Computer Science, Jinan 250014, China (email: xulj@sdas.org; zhaozicheng1030@126.com; zhaodw@sdas.org).
Zhen Wang is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and
Electronics (iOPEN) and the School of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710072, China (e-mail:
zhenwang0@gmail.com).
Chunpeng Ge is with the Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence
Research (C-FAIR) and the School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan
250014, China (e-mail: gechunpeng2022@126.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2026.3653175

Index Terms—Provenance graphs, subgraph clustering, attention networks, APT detection.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE field of network security is facing increasingly complex threats, among which advanced persistent threats
(APTs) have become one of the most challenging due to their
stealthiness and complexity. APTs are characterized by longterm latency, sparse distribution, and hard-to-trace behaviors,
which challenge traditional detection methods. Provenance
graphs, crucial for APT detection, help track attack paths
and identify anomalies by capturing the entire system execution [1]. They parse host events from system logs, covering
processes, files, network nodes, and their relationships, while
tracing complex dependencies [2] and hidden paths [3] of
APTs. Several detection methods [1], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]
show advantages in intrusion detection using provenance
graphs. However, the large-scale nature of these graphs, with
numerous nodes and complex relationships, results in high
computational complexity, coarse-grained detection, and insufficient learning patterns, limiting the practical applicability of
existing methods [9].
Existing methods [10], [11], [12] use representative training data and sequence processing techniques (e.g., recurrent
neural networks) to model past events and predict future
ones, resulting in high time complexity. To address this issue,
StreamSpot [13], UNICORN [7] and KAIROS [14] build
a flow graph and maintain it in memory to enable faster
querying. Additionally, MEGR-APT [15] first partitions the
input graph into subgraphs, computes their embeddings, and
then constructs an optimized query graph for efficient matching. While effective, these methods are limited to graph-level
APT detection, offering insufficient granularity. Consequently,
security analysts must perform detailed node-level and edgelevel inspections within flagged subgraphs to accurately trace
APTs.
Node-level detection methods demonstrate superior capability in addressing coarse-grained detection limitations. Two
representative approaches include: (1) representation learning
through fixed-size neighborhood sampling [8], and (2) comprehensive graph representation learning based on graph neural
networks (GNN) [1], [14], [16]. Sampling-based methods
incur information loss, which degrades detection accuracy.
In contrast, the whole-graph representation learning approach
constructs a node anomaly classifier and utilizes an embedded cyclic database to store node embeddings, significantly

1556-6021 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1066

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Fig. 1. The comparison of clustering-based subgraph partitioning in TraceCluster, nodes sampling in ThreaTrace, and all node aggregating method.
TABLE I
T IME AND S PACE C OMPLEXITY OF GCN T RAINING A LGORITHMS . L R EPRESENTS THE N UMBER OF L AYERS , N I S THE N UMBER OF N ODES , AND
E I S THE N UMBER OF E DGES . F IN AND F OUT A RE THE D IMENSIONS OF I NPUT AND O UTPUT F EATURES , R ESPECTIVELY. F OR S IMPLICITY, W E
A SSUME T HAT THE F EATURE D IMENSIONS A RE F IXED ACROSS A LL L AYERS . F OR N EIGHBOR -S AMPLING -BASED A PPROACHES S UCH AS
G RAPH SAGE AND FAST GCN, S I S THE N UMBER OF S AMPLED N EIGHBORS P ER N ODE AT E ACH L AYER . I N VR-GCN, S C AN B E
S MALLER D UE TO THE VARIANCE R EDUCTION T ECHNIQUE . F OR C LUSTER -GCN AND C LUSTER -S UBGRAPH -ATTENTION ,
C I S THE N UMBER OF S UBGRAPHS , Nc AND Ec A RE THE AVERAGE N UMBER OF N ODES AND E DGES P ER S UBGRAPH ,
R ESPECTIVELY. K R EPRESENTS THE N UMBER OF ATTENTION H EADS U SED IN ATTENTION -BASED M ETHODS

reducing training time. While ensuring high detection efficiency and fine-grained detection, this method suffers from
poor time efficiency during inference. Unlike ThreaTrace and
UNICORN, the ORTHRUS [16]’s anomalous node detection
approach results in a relatively high false negative rate. That
is partly because it no longer classifies the neighbors of
anomalous nodes as anomalous, which is a critical concern
in cybersecurity analysis.
To address these issues, we propose TraceCluster, a
lightweight and adaptive clustering-based APT detection
method. TraceCluster employs a clustering-based subgraph
partitioning strategy for large-scale provenance graphs, preserving causal dependencies between neighboring nodes while
avoiding the high complexity of global graph computation.
Additionally, it introduces a novel approach that dynamically
captures complex internode relationships within subgraphs,
using attention mechanisms to focus on the most relevant
connections, significantly reducing computational complexity
compared to traditional GCN methods.
Similarly to the typical provenance graph–based APT detection approach [8], TraceCluster learns the role of each benign
node within the data provenance graphs to identify stealthy
anomalous behaviors without relying on previous knowledge
of attack patterns. The training data are benign, while the
validation and test datasets contain a large number of benign
nodes and a small proportion of anomalous nodes.

We compare our cluster-based subgraph partitioning with
all nodes aggregating method and fixed-size neighborhood
sampling of ThreaTrace [8] in Figure 1. In order to illustrate
the computational efficiency of our proposed approach, we
provide Table I, which presents a comparison of time complexity and space complexity between our clustering-based
subgraph attention network (SAN) and other models.
Cluster-GCN employs a clustering strategy to improve
training efficiency. However, its fundamental design focuses
on graph partitioning, where the entire graph is divided
into smaller blocks for parallel computation. In particular, it
does not incorporate any subgraph-level attention mechanism
within these partitions. In contrast, TraceCluster introduces a
subgraph-level attention mechanism that dynamically assigns
weights to the interactions among nodes within each subgraph.
This design enables the model to more accurately capture
inter-node dependencies and uncover latent anomalous patterns.
Given the data imbalance between normal and anomalous
nodes inherent in APT detection, TraceCluster proposes an
adaptive category weighted mechanism in the loss function.
This assigns different weights to samples of varying classes,
strengthening the model’s ability to detect rare anomalies.
This is particularly effective in addressing stealthy and covert
attacks, ensuring that anomalous samples are emphasized
during training.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: TraceCluster: A LIGHTWEIGHT AND ADAPTIVE CLUSTERING-BASED SAN

The contributions of this paper are summarised as follows:
• Lightweight subgraph partitions and subgraph attention network. TraceCluster partials the large-scale origin
graph into multi-smaller subgraphs and independently
performs graph attention operations in each subgraph.
Graph partitioning technology not only optimizes computational efficiency, but also preserves the local structural
features of the APT behaviour, thereby enhancing the
scalability of the model. Furthermore, by aggregation
attention based on node adjacency relationships and
edge types, TraceCluster generates highly discriminative
node feature representations, thereby enhancing nodelevel threat detection and significantly improving its
capability to identify complex APT attacks.
• Adaptive category weighting mechanism. We innovatively propose a category weighting mechanism that
dynamically assigns weights to different node categories,
significantly enhancing the model’s ability to detect rare
and anomalous behaviours. This approach improves the
detection performance for latent and covert attacks while
also increasing the model’s adaptability in imbalanced
data environments.
• High detection performance and efficiency. TraceCluster demonstrates excellent detection performance. It
achieves 37-fold and 3-fold reductions in inference time
compared to the state-of-the-art approaches, respectively.
Furthermore, in the nine real-world scenarios of four
evaluated datasets, TraceCluster outperforms state-of-theart approaches (SOTA) in terms of overall performance.
Availability: TraceCluster is available online at https://
github.com/CSNS-Lab/TraceCluster
The paper is organized as follows: related work is presented
in Section II. Section III presents background and motivation.
Section IV describes the threat model. In Section V, we
present the design of TraceCluster. We show the evaluation
performance in Section VI. Section VII is a discussion of
limitations. Finally, the full paper is summarised.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Anomaly-based APT detection methods that regard a system
as anomalous by first learning its normal behavioral patterns,
and then recognizing it as anomalous when its behavior
deviates from these patterns. This type of approach does not
rely on predefined attack patterns, and thus is more flexible in
dealing with unknown attacks.
DeepLog [23] and Tiresias [24] model normal behaviour
and detect abnormal user behaviour through repeated neural
networks (RNN), which focus on sequential data, are not
sufficiently capable of capturing global relationships in graph
structures. Therefore, they are not suitable for large-scale
data structures. LogRobust [25] improves the ability to model
log sequences through bidirectional long-short-term memory (LSTM) combined with the attention mechanism, which
allows it to better capture complex contextual correlation
information. However, it has high computational complexity
and weak adaptation to unbalanced data in the processing of
long-sequence data and complex logs. Instead of directly dealing with the graph structure, LogGAN [26] uses adversarial

1067

training to generate and detect anomalous log events, solving
the problem of data imbalance. Although LogGAN performs
well in detecting known attacks, it is based on training
data and could not effectively identify zero-day attacks. In
addition, it also has high resource consumption due to the
computational overhead of the adversarial training process of
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN). T-Trace [27] proposes a training-free data-driven APT detection method, which
uses tensor decomposition to mine implicit relationships in
original logs and pruning techniques to solve the dependency
explosion problem. This approach is suitable for dealing with
local data structures, however, it lacks the ability to model full
graphs or complex graph structures.
Several scholars have endeavored to tackle the issue through
learning graph structures. UNICORN [7] extracts the structural
features of the provenance graph using the Weissfeiler-Lehman
(WL) graph kernel [28] to detect APT attacks through the
structural similarity of the graph. However, the graph kernel
approach has high computational complexity and low efficiency in large-scale data processing. ThreaTrace [8] detects
and tracks threat activities in hosts through provenance graph
learning using a node-level feature extraction approach combined with graph structure analysis. Although it uses the
GraphSAGE model, which assigns the same importance to
all neighbour nodes, its consideration of only a fixed number
of neighbours led to sampling issues that caused the loss of
important information, reducing the accuracy and sensitivity
of anomaly detection.
As evidenced by the aforementioned studies, excessive
resource consumption constitutes a critical challenge that cannot be overlooked in provenance graph-based APT detection.
ProvG-Searcher [29] shows high efficiency in the search for
provenance graphs. The method is based heavily on wellstructured input data. This means that in practical applications,
if the data structure is unclear, performance may suffer
significantly, and the computational cost increases notably
when encountering large-scale data. Furthermore, DISTDET
[30], while cost-effective in a distributed architecture, faces
challenges in the management and coordination of distributed
systems, particularly with communication delays and synchronisation issues, which could affect the effectiveness of
real-time detection.
SHADEWATCHER [31] formulates provenance-based
threat detection as a recommendation task over system
entity interactions. It produces fine-grained, interactionlevel alerts and supports semi-supervised adaptation with
analyst feedback. However, SHADEWATCHER still relies
on GPU-heavy training, incurs non-trivial offline overhead
for provenance graph construction, leaving room for lighterweight and more incrementally updatable designs.
NODLink [32] combines VAE-based node anomaly scoring
with an online Steiner tree formulation to reconstruct compact attack stories from large provenance graphs. It achieves
fine-grained, node-level investigation while maintaining high
detection accuracy and practical throughput in realistic SOC
environments. However, NODLink uses non-GNN representations, and builds on Steiner Tree Problem (STP)-based
optimization together with a graph-database–backed pipeline,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1068

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

which increases engineering complexity and limits scalability
to very large, highly dynamic graphs. These limitations indicate remaining space for more scalable, GNN-based designs
that can better capture higher-order structural patterns while
retaining fine-grained detection and efficiency, as pursued in
this work.
MEGR-APT [15] and FLASH [1] have demonstrated
remarkable efficacy in addressing efficiency-related challenges
within computational systems. MEGR-APT first partitions
the input graph into subgraphs, computes their embeddings, and then constructs an optimized query graph for
efficient matching. Despite its efficacy, it is limited to graphlevel APT detection, resulting in insufficient granularity.
FLASH [1] combines the graph neural network and the
provenance graph to improve the detection accuracy through
Word2Vec and GNN encoders. It also optimizes computational
efficiency using an embedded recycling database, enabling
real-time APT detection. Although FLASH maintains high
detection efficiency and achieves fine-grained detection, it
nevertheless exhibits unsatisfactory time efficiency during the
inference phase.
KAIROS [14] applies temporal graph representation learning to model both structural and temporal dependencies in
audit logs, and then derives compact attack summary graphs
to support analyst investigation, achieving strong detection
performance on multiple DARPA TC and OpTC datasets.
While effective, KAIROS incurs non-trivial computational
overhead for large time windows.
ORTHRUS [16] applies a graph neural network
(GNN)–based encoder-decoder to model normal behavior.
Detected anomalous nodes are then used to perform attack
path reconstruction, generating a compact subgraph that
highlights the most relevant entities involved in the attack.
Unlike ThreaTrace and UNICORN, the ORTHRUS [16]’s
anomalous node detection approach results in a relatively
high false negative rate. That is partly because it no longer
classifies the neighbors of anomalous nodes as anomalous,
which is a critical concern in cybersecurity analysis.
The above analysis of the research landscape reveals
that while extensive investigations have been conducted on
optimising temporal efficiency, minimising resource expenditure, and improving detection accuracy in large-scale graph
processing systems, node-level APT detection mechanisms
persistently exhibit three fundamental limitations: unsustainable computational overhead, prohibitive inference latency,
and suboptimal operational efficiency metrics.

III. BACKGROUND & M OTIVATION
A. Data Provence
Data provenance is a directed acyclic graph constructed
from audit data representing the relationship between subjects
(e.g., processes) and objects (e.g., files) in a system [7], [13].
By capturing detailed contextual relationships among system
entities and events, data provenance has been proposed as a
promising source for host-based threat detection [1], [8].

B. Motivation Example
We present an example in Figure 2, to illustrate the limitation of state-of-the-art threat detection work and the intuition
of our approach. The example is generated from the DARPA
OpTC experiment.1 The dark nodes are those nodes related to
the intrusion campaign.
The attacker installs Notepad plus with a malicious upgrade
ability in the victim host. The Malicious process “cKfGW.exe”
gets “cmd” shell to run commands to find out information
about local system, and migrates from process “cKfGW.exe”
to process “lsass.exe”, to connect to attacker’s server. To
establish persistence via meterpreter, the process “cKfGW.exe”
is migrated to process “lwabeat”, who writes a script to
C:\Windows\TEMP\myHbYXTpViwX.vbx and set autorun to
the registry.
Limitations of state-of-the-art threat detection work: It
remains some challenges to detect the threat presented in
the example, which leads to limitations of the state-of-the-art
threat detection work.
• Stealthy attack behavior. Anomaly-based methods, such
as Unicorn [7], StreamSpot [13], and ORTHRUS [16],
use graph kernel algorithm or GNN to dynamically model
the whole graph and detect abnormal graphs by clustering approaches. However, the intrusion may be stealthy,
which means that a system’s provenance graph under
intrusion campaign may be similar to those of benign
systems. In this example, there are hundreds of thousands
of benign nodes and less than 200 anomalous nodes. The
proportion of anomalous nodes is less than 0.1%, which
thus results in a high similarity of the attack graph and
benign graph. Therefore, graph-kernel-based methods are
insensitive to the small anomalous nodes.
• Exhibits low traceability. Graph-level detection methods
[15] first partitioning the input graph into subgraphs, and
then constructing an optimized query graph for efficient
matching. lack the capability of tracing the location of
anomalous behavior, which is vital to trace abnormal
behavior and fix the system. In this example, these methods can only raise alarms for the whole graph instead of
the specific attack entities (e.g.,myHbYXTpViwX.vbx).
• Low time efficiency. ThreaTrace requires multiple rounds
of testing on the model, sometimes up to more than
20 times, to find the optimal test result. Obviously,
it suffers from lower inference time. To eliminate this
flaw, Flash [1] optimizes computational efficiency using
an embedded recycling database. However, querying the
database also incurs a certain amount of time overhead.
Although MEGR-APT [15] uses a graph query database
to improve inference efficiency, it still runs slower
than our method. In this example, ThreaTrace, Flash
and MEGR-APT require 80 seconds, 32 seconds, and
2.4 seconds, respectively, to perform the inference steps.

1 https://drive.google.com/drive/u/0/folders/1n3kkS3KR31KUegn42yk3e6JkZvf0Caa

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: TraceCluster: A LIGHTWEIGHT AND ADAPTIVE CLUSTERING-BASED SAN

1069

Fig. 2. The example from mailicious upgrade scence of DARPA OpTC experiment.

IV. T HREAT M ODEL
A. Adversary Capabilities
The adversary is characterized as an APT, exhibiting techniques and operational goals that are consistent with those
defined in the MITRE ATT&CK knowledge base.2
• Stealty. The adversary exploites multiple zero-day vulnerabilities and combined various attack methods to launch
a slow infiltration attack on the target system. The attack
behavior pattern is similar to normal operations, and the
victim system is unable to detect the existence of the
attack. Therefore, we are unable to obtain information
about its attack pattern.
• Persistence. The capability to remain covertly embedded
within a compromised system for an extended period,
maintaining long-term presence and conducting multiple
attacks over time.
In additions, we consider that attack patterns are embedded
within the provenance graph. The adversary’s actions cause
certain nodes in the system’s provenance graph to deviate
locally from normal behavioral patterns, thereby leaving discernible traces of malicious activity within the provenance
data.
B. Assume
In this paper, an entity within a running system is defined
as benign when it exhibits no association with malicious
activities. Conversely, an entity is regarded as abnormal if
its behavioral patterns deviate from those of benign entities,
which commonly results from ongoing intrusion campaigns.
Our analysis centers on the nodes of the provenance graph to
identify anomalous entities at the host level. We further assume
that the system’s audit logging and provenance collection
mechanisms are both comprehensive and trustworthy, and
cannot be tampered with or compromised by adversaries [31].
TraceCluster cannot detect threats which have no different
patterns in the provenance graph compared to the benign
2 https://www.mitre.org/capabilities/cybersecurity/threat-based-defense

entities learned in training phase. We further discuss this
limitation in Section VIII.
V. P ROPOSED A PPROACH
In this section, we present the design of TraceCluster. The
main components are shown in Figure 3. We will describe
them in further detail in the following subsections.
Algorithm 1 TraceCluster: Subgraph Training and Anomaly
Detection
Require: Graph G, node features X, adjacency matrix A, labels
Y, number of clusters K, learning rate η, threshold τ
Ensure: Trained Model, List of Abnormal Nodes
1: clusters ← METIS.partition(G, K)
2: model ← SAN()
3: optimizer ← Optimizer(model.parameters(), lr = η)
4: for epoch = 1tonum epochs do
5:
for each cluster in shuffle(clusters) do
6:
sub nodes ← cluster.nodes
7:
sub ad j ← A[sub nodes, sub nodes]
8:
sub f eatures ← X[sub nodes]
9:
sub labels ← Y[sub nodes]
10:
output ← model(sub f eatures, sub ad j)
11:
loss ← WeightedLoss(output, sub labels)
12:
optimizer.zero grad()
13:
loss.backward()
14:
optimizer.step()
15:
end for
16: end for
17: abnormal nodes ← []
18: for each node, prob in enumerate(output) do
19:
if prob > τ then
20:
abnormal nodes.append(node)
21:
end if
22: end for
23: return model, abnormal nodes
Algorithm 1 describes the implementation of TraceCluster.
The input to the model includes the graph G, node features X,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1070

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Fig. 3. TraceCluster detection process includes data provenance generator, subgraph division, feature extraction, model train, and final anomaly detection.
1. Extract data from the system log database and external tools to build a provenance graph. 2. Simplify the structure of the global graph by aggregating nodes
and edges, and then divide the coarsened global graph into subgraphs. 3. Assign labels to nodes based their types or distributions, and construct the initial
feature direction for each node. 4. During the training phase, the subgraphs are then structurally optimized and randomly selected as batches, and attention
is used to aggregating the nodes and edges for training the subgraphs in turn to share global graph information. 5. The trained model is used for anomaly
detection that combines with the threshold mechanism to classify nodes or edges, and output normal or abnormal status.

adjacency matrix A, labels Y, the number of clusters K, and
the threshold τ used for APT detection.
Initially, we adopt the METIS algorithm [33] to partition the
graph into K subgraph clusters, stored in the variable clusters.
Each cluster is designed to be trained independently. During
training, the clusters are randomly selected in each epoch to
mitigate bias caused by fixed sequential order. For each cluster,
the corresponding subgraph nodes, adjacency matrix, and node
features are extracted.
The model performs forward propagation on the subgraph,
producing predictions denoted as output.
Once training is complete, the model outputs the probability
of anomalies for each node. If the predicted probability for a
node exceeds the threshold thr, the node is identified as an
anomalous node and added to the list of anomalous nodes.
Finally, the trained model and the list of detected anomalous
nodes are returned.
A. Provenance Graph Generator
The provenance graph generator illustrates the complete
process from system log collection to provenance graph
generation. Initially, the system collects log data from various sources, such as servers and endpoint devices. These
logs contain information about the subjects (e.g., processes),
objects (e.g., files, network streams), and the interaction events
between them. All collected logs are stored in the System Log
Database (System Log DB), providing a stable foundation for
subsequent processing.
Next, external tools such as Camflow [34] are utilized
to analyse and process stored log data. Camflow captures

and constructs information flows in chronological order while
ensuring robust data integrity and security. During this process,
the relationships between subjects, objects, and their associated events are clearly extracted, forming a structured data
model.
Finally, the processed data are transformed into a provenance graph, which visually represents the entities in the
system and their interrelations. In a provenance graph, the
nodes represent the subjects and objects, such as files, network
streams, or system processes, while the edges illustrate the
interactions between these entities. This visual representation
enables analysts to quickly identify system behaviors, dependencies, or anomalies, effectively trace attack paths, analyse
threat origins, and improve the accuracy and efficiency of
intrusion detection and provenance analysis.
B. Subgraph Division for Large-Scale Graphs
Subgraph division plays a critical role in reducing computational complexity and improving computational efficiency
when dealing with large-scale graph tasks. We adopt a multistage strategy to effectively partite large graphs while ensuring
high partition quality. The process of subgraph division mainly
includes three main steps: graph coarsening, initial partitioning, and graph expanding.
1) Graph Coarsening: During the initial step of subgraph
division, graph coarsening is performed to reduce the graph
size. The input graph G = (V, E) is transformed by merging
nodes and creating coarse-level representations. Specifically,
given two nodes u and v, if there exists an edge (u, v) in the
graph, the two nodes can be merged into a single supernode.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: TraceCluster: A LIGHTWEIGHT AND ADAPTIVE CLUSTERING-BASED SAN

The resulting coarsened graph is denoted as G0 = (V 0 , E 0 ),
where V 0 represents the set of supernodes, and |V 0 |  |V|.
Through this approach, the size of the graph is significantly
reduced, facilitating the subsequent partitioning process. The
coarsening process is typically implemented using maximum
matching algorithms, where nodes with relatively higher edge
weights are prioritized for merging. The goal of coarsening is
to preserve the overall structure and connectivity of the graph
while minimizing the number of nodes and edges, thus laying
the foundation for the initial partitioning phase.
2) Graph Partitioning: After coarsening the graph, the next
step is to perform the initial partitioning of the coarsened
graph G0 . The goal of partitioning is to divide the graph
into subgraphs k, S 1 , S 2 , . . ., S k , while achieving two main
objectives:
• Minimize partition size. This objective aims to reduce
the number of edges between different subgraphs as much
as possible.
• Balancing the load of the nodes. During the partitioning process, the nodes of each subgraph are kept
relatively balanced to ensure load balance for subsequent
computations.
In large-scale graph applications, such as anomaly detection,
minimizing the partition size is essential to improve the
detection accuracy. Reducing the edge between subgraphs
helps reduce communication overhead and data transmission bottlenecks, thereby enhancing computational efficiency
during further refinement steps. This is particularly critical
for complex graphs, where minimizing partition size directly
alleviates computational burdens.
The partition size can be mathematically defined as:
partition(S 1 , S 2 , . . ., S k ) =

k
X
X

w(u, v),

(1)

i=1 u∈S i ,v∈S j

where w(u, v) represents the weight of the edge between nodes
u and v.
Maintaining load balance in graph partitioning is essential
for improving parallel computational performance and model
scalability. A balanced partition ensures that the computational
resources allocated to each subgraph are roughly equal, preventing the computational load imbalance caused by uneven
subgraph sizes. The load imbalance can impact the training
process, as different subgraphs may contain varying distributions of nodes and edges, which could result in inconsistent
learning outcomes. By balancing the partitioning process, the
model ensures stability during training and avoids problems
caused by unequal learning rates or data updates due to size
discrepancies among subgraphs.
The condition for load balance can be expressed as:
|S i | ≈

|V|
,
k

∀i ∈ {1, 2, . . ., k},

(2)

where S i represents the set of nodes in subgraph i, |V| is the
total number of nodes, and k is the number of subgraphs.
By simultaneously minimising the cut size and maintaining
the load balance, we can achieve high computational efficiency
while improving the accuracy and stability of the model.

1071

3) Graph Expanding: After completing the initial partitioning of the coarsened graph, the expansion process begins,
where the coarsened graph G0 is progressively restored to its
original size G. In this step, each supernode is decomposed
back into its original nodes, and these nodes inherit the
subgraph assignments from the coarsened graph.
The partition results are propagated incrementally from
the coarsened graph to the original graph, ensuring that the
assignments maintain consistency. At each stage, the partitioning results are refined to achieve better nodes and edges
balance while reducing edge cuts. The process recovers the
original modular structure of the graph, and the partition
quality achieved during the initial partitioning stage is further
enhanced.
Local optimisation techniques are applied to further adjust
and optimize partition results. The objective of these techniques are to reduce edge partitioning by selectively moving
nodes between subgraphs while maintaining balance among
the subgraphs.
Refinement typically uses algorithms such as
Kernighan-Lin [35] or Fiduccia-Mattheyses methods [36].
These algorithms iteratively optimize the placement of the
nodes by evaluating and exchanging nodes across subgraph
boundaries to minimize the cut size. Nodes that can be moved
to a neighboring subgraph without violating the load balance
condition are identified. If such a move leads to a significant
reduction in edge cuts, the node is reassigned.
C. Feature Extraction
Detecting anomalous nodes in the absence of prior knowledge is a significant challenge. Traditional methods rely
on annotated data for training. However, such methods are
ineffective when faced with novel attack modes. Previous
approaches assumed that neighboring nodes are highly similar,
but this assumption does not always hold in heterogeneous
graphs (e.g., nodes with varying types and connections).
Therefore, it is necessary to adopt a more adaptive feature
extraction approach.
To address this, TraceCluster combines initial label assignment with node feature initialisation, enabling efficient
anomaly detection under scenarios without prior knowledge.
1) Label Assignment: Initially, nodes are assigned labels
based on their types or distributions. These labels serve as
auxiliary information for model learning, helping to distinguish nodes of different types. Assume that each node vi has
a specific type label, such as process nodes, file nodes, or
network connection nodes. For each node vi , the label li is
defined as:
li = type(vi ).
(3)
2) Feature Initialisation: Based on the connection relationships between the nodes, the distribution of the edge types
is used to construct the initial feature direction for each
node. Suppose that the input graph is G = (V, E), where
V represents the set of nodes and E represents the set of
edges. For each node vi ∈ V, its feature vector ai consists of
two parts: incoming feature information and outgoing feature
information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1072

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Fig. 4. Examples of feature extraction.

Assume that there are t edge types. For node vi , the
dimension of its feature vector ai is 2t: the first dimensions
t represent the incoming edge information and the remaining
dimensions t represent the outgoing edge information. The
feature vector for node vi is expressed as:
(1) (2)
(t) (1) (2)
(t)
ai = [din
, din , . . ., din
, dout , dout , . . ., dout
],
(t)
din

(4)

(t)
dout

where
and
represent the number of incoming and
outgoing edges of type t for node vi .
As illustrated in Figure 4, if the feature vector of a node
is ai = [1, 1, 2, 2, 1, 0], it indicates that the node has varying
numbers of incoming and outgoing edges of different types.
Specifically, the first three values [1, 1, 2] represent the counts
of incoming edges of three types of edges, while the last
three values [2, 1, 0] represent the counts of outgoing edges.
By combining label assignment with feature initialisation, our
unsupervised framework enables node-level anomaly detection
without the need for prior anomaly data. This approach also
provides robust representations of foundational features, laying
the solid foundation for subsequent clustering or classification
tasks.
D. Model Training and Optimization
In terms of model training and optimization, TraceCluster
integrates adaptive characteristics with efficient graph partitioning methods to maximize the detection capability of
anomalous nodes in large-scale heterogeneous graphs. The
training and optimization process focuses on the following
aspects.
1) Dynamic Subgraph Training Strategy: TraceCluster first
partitions the heterogeneous graph into multiple subgraphs.
Each subgraph is treated as an independent training sample.
To ensure complete learning of node features in large-scale
heterogeneous graphs, TraceCluster adopts a mini-batch-like
dynamic subgraph training strategy. In each training iteration,
one or more subgraphs are randomly selected for training and
the subgraphs are periodically replaced during the training
process. This ensures that the model learns comprehensive
information from different subgraphs. During each iteration,
the nodes obtained from the dynamically sampled subgraphs
are used to calculate the batch loss function Lbatch .
The batch loss function is defined as:
X
Lbatch = −
wyi log (p(yi | xi )) ,
(5)
i∈I

where I is the set of nodes sampled from the mini-batch
subgraph, yi is the true label of node i, p(yi | xi ) is the predicted
probability of node i belonging to class yi , and wyi is the weight
assigned to class yi . Specifically, wyi based on class sample
counts, is used to address the class imbalance problem. We
describe wyi in V-D2.
By applying attention operations to a set of subgraphs, SAN
dynamically adjusts the importance coefficients between the
neighboring nodes and the central node. The attention mechanism computes the importance coefficient αi j of a neighboring
node j to a central node i as follows:



exp LeakyReLU ~aT [~hi k~h j ]


 ,
(6)
αi j = P
T [~
~hk ]
~
exp
LeakyReLU
a
h
k
i
k∈N(i)
where ~hi and ~h j represent the feature vectors of nodes i and
j, respectively, and N(i) denotes the set of neighbors for
node i. The learnable vector ~a T is employed to measure the
correlation between nodes. This vector is initialized using the
Xavier uniform distribution at the beginning of training, and
is subsequently updated together with other model parameters
through backpropagation and an optimizer. In this way, ~a
gradually learns a weight direction that reflects the relative
importance of neighboring nodes.
Through this strategy, SAN not only improves anomaly
detection performance within local subgraphs, but also
improves the overall structural understanding of the heterogeneous graph. This enables TraceCluster to effectively identify
the multistage attack phases and intricate behaviors of APT.
2) Class Weight Design: Specifically, classes with fewer
samples are assigned higher weights, while classes with larger
sample counts are assigned lower weights. The class weight
wk is inversely proportional to the sample count for class k,
which is calculated as follows:
Ck =

N
X

1(yi = k)

(7)

i=1

wk =

1
,
Ck

(8)

where N is the total number of nodes, and 1(yi = k) is an
indicator function that evaluates to 1 when node i belongs to
class k, and 0 otherwise. To prevent the class weights from
being excessively large or small, we normalize the weights so
that their sum equals 1. The normalized weight w0k is defined
as:
wk
.
(9)
w0k = PK
k=1 wk
The calculated class weights w0k are then applied to the batch
loss function during the training process. Specifically, for a
node, the loss value is weighted by its corresponding class
weight, as shown in Equation 5. Through this method, SAN
focuses more on classes with fewer samples during the training
process, effectively mitigating the impact of class imbalance.
This not only improves the predictive accuracy for underrepresented classes, but also enhances the overall performance
of the classification task.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: TraceCluster: A LIGHTWEIGHT AND ADAPTIVE CLUSTERING-BASED SAN

E. Anomaly Detection
After the model training is completed, the final output is
the anomaly probability for each node. The model categorizes
the nodes and generates a probability distribution indicating
the nodes. During the testing phase, the model leverages these
probabilities to determine if a node is potentially anomalous.
If the probability of an anomaly for a node exceeds a
predefined threshold, the node is marked as anomalous, indicating that it might be subject to an APT attack. Similar
to most expert-recognized approaches [1], [8], TraceCluster
learns baseline patterns of normal behavior from benign data,
thus eliminating the need to incorporate labels indicating
whether a node is malicious during the training phase. In
the anomaly detection phase, this work first predicts the
probability distribution of node labels. If the classification
probability exceeds a predefined threshold of 0.5, the node is
considered potentially malicious. Following the methodology
in [1] and [8], the final hyperparameter values are determined
by exhaustively searching the hyperparameter space.
This probability-based anomaly detection mechanism allows
TraceCluster to effectively identify hidden attack paths and
anomalous nodes in complex APT attack scenarios. By outputting anomaly probabilities, security analysts can further
assess potential threats, analyze their severity, and provide
actionable insights to detect and mitigate APT attacks.
VI. E XPERIMENTATION AND A NALYSIS
In this section, we evaluate the detection and inference time
performance of the proposed TraceCluster.
Hardware Configuration: Our experiments are performed
on a workstation running Ubuntu 22.04.3 LTS, equipped with
an AMD Ryzen Threadripper PRO 9955WX (16 cores), an
NVIDIA RTX 5090, 64GB memory, and a 1TB SSD.
Preprocessing Costs: TraceCluster only parses the raw logs
and extracts the required fields (e.g., entity identifiers, event
types, timestamps) without any expensive feature engineering
or additional model-dependent computation. Therefore, the
preprocessing overhead is negligible compared to the subsequent graph-based inference pipeline.
A. Baseline Models and Datasets
1) Baseline Models: Ten algorithms are chosen as baselines, that is, StreamSpot [13], UNICORN [7], Log2Vec [11],
DeepLog [23], LogRobust [12], LogGAN [26], ThreaTrace
[8], FLASH [1], KAIROS [14], and ORTHRUS [16], whose
details have been described in Section II. We do not include
MEGR-APT [15] as a baseline for detection performance comparison since it is a graph-level detection method. However,
due to its relatively fast detection speed, we adopt it as the
baseline model for inference time evaluation.
2) StreamSpot: StreamSpot3 (Table II) is an experimental
dataset designed to study network anomaly detection [13]. It
includes six scenarios: five representing normal behaviors and
one representing an attack behavior. The dataset is stored in
tab-delimited file format, where each row represents an edge,
3 https://github.com/sbustreamspot/sbustreamspot-data

1073

TABLE II
OVERVIEW OF S TREAM S POT DATASET

TABLE III
OVERVIEW OF DARPA TC # E3 AND # E5 DATASETS

containing the source node ID, source node type, destination
node ID, destination node type, edge type, and graph ID.
It contains 6*100 information flow graphs derived from five
benign scenes and one attack scene. Each scene runs 100 times
to generate 100 graphs using the Linux System Tap logging
system [37]. We use the same validation strategy as [8] to
randomly split the dataset into a training set with 75*5 benign
graphs and a testing set with 25*5 benign graphs and 25 attack
graphs.
3) DARPA TC # E3: DARPA TC project’s Engagement
3 dataset4 (Table III) was produced as part of DARPA’s
Transparent Computing initiative [38]. The third engagement
specifically targets the exploration and analysis of APT behaviors at a foundational level. The # E3 dataset encompasses
multiple attack scenarios, including post-compromise activities, spear-phishing attacks, data exfiltration, APT attacks,
etc. The dataset provides fine-grained data, including system
processes, files, network activities, and system calls, making
it suitable for basic anomaly detection and preliminary threat
source analysis.
The # E3 dataset lasted for two weeks. During the engagements, the red team performed attacks and benign background
activity to hosts with different systems. Three kinds of attackers are involved in the red-team including Nation State,
Common Threat and Metasploit. The provenance collecting
tools captured provenance data of the whole system from start
to end. The provenance data and ground truth are publicly
available [38]. Therefore, we use the ground truth to label the
abnormal nodes and evaluate TraceCluster’s performance of
detecting them, which shows the ability of tracking anomaly.
The Details of validation strategy is similar to [8]. Files that
have no threats are used to train the models and files with
threats are used for evaluation.
4) DARPA TC # E5: Building upon the foundation of
the # E3 dataset, the # E5 dataset5 (Table III) lasted for
9 days, is larger in scale and designed with more sophisticated
4 https://github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-Computing/blob/master/
README-E3.md
5 https://github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-Computing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1074

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

TABLE IV
OVERVIEW OF DARPA O P TC DATASET

attack scenarios, including multistage attack chains, multi-host
collaboration, data exfiltration and encryption, antiforensic
activities, and advanced network communications. It is especially valuable for analysing the behavioural patterns and
defensive strategies associated with complex APT attacks.
We use the same ground truth and validation strategy with
the # E3 dataset.
5) DARPA OpTC: The DAPRA OpTC dataset6 (Table IV)
is an open source resource designed for network security
research and attack detection, containing audit logs from
approximately 1,000 hosts. The dataset includes 7 days of
benign activity data and 3 days of malicious activity data,
with each day of malicious activity representing a different
type of attack. We use benign activity data for training, and
utilize labels of malicious activity from FLASH [1]. For
evaluation purposes, we focus on the attack data from Day
2 and Day 3. On day 2, the logs document an attacker who
sends phishing emails with a malicious “Custom PowerShell
Empire stager”. The stager is used to escalate privileges,
exfiltrate data, and perform lateral movement on the domain
controller. The attacker establishes persistence through WMI
subscriptions and transfers data using RDP and SSH. On
day 3, the dataset records an attacker exploiting a “malicious
upgrade” vulnerability in the Notepad Plus software. The
attacker remotely downloads and executes a malicious program called update.exe, gaining access to the system,
performing lateral movement, using Meterpreter to collect
sensitive information and establishing persistence.
For data partitioning, we split all benign data into training
and validation sets with an 8:2 ratio, and use the datasets
containing malicious nodes exclusively as the test set.
B. Comparison of Detection Performance Between
TraceCluster and Baseline Advanced Detection Models
1) Comparison and Analysis of Detection Performance on
StreamSpot Dataset: In this section, we discuss the performance primarily in the StreamSpot dataset, as shown in
Table V. We adopt the same validation strategy as UNICOIN
[7], randomly splitting the dataset into a training set containing
75*5 benign graphs and a test set containing 25*5 benign
graphs and 25 attack graphs. The TP/FP/TN/FN values in
the table represent the average evaluation results obtained by
repeating this process. The TraceCluster exhibits exceptional
overall capability in detection tasks, effectively maintaining a
low false positive rate while achieving near-perfect positive
coverage (extremely low false negative rate).
Compared to other models, TraceCluster shows significant performance advantages. Even when StreamSpot and
6 https://drive.google.com/drive/u/0/folders/1n3kkS3KR31KUegn42yk3e6JkZvf0Caa

UNICORN perform well, TraceCluster surpasses both models
across all metrics, particularly with a Recall of 0.99, indicating
that the model can detect nearly all positive cases.
2) Comparison and Analysis of Detection Performance on
DARPA TC # E3 and # E5 Datasets: As shown in Table VI,
due to the large number of DARPA TC datasets, we chose
to test the dataset used on the FLASH [1], and the experimental results are shown in the table. The rest of the results
were compared based on the results in ThreaTrace [8]. We
run KAIROS [14] and ORTHRUS [16] on # E3 Cadets,
# E5 Theia, and # E5 Cadets datasets, as their approaches
exhibit relatively high efficiency on the corresponding datasets
reported in their original papers. Experimental results indicate
that TraceCluster achieves the best performance in terms
of F1-score and False Positive Rate (FPR) across the six
evaluation scenarios. Although its recall is slightly lower, the
precision remains satisfactory. The False Negative Rate (FNR)
is not the lowest, however, except for the results on the E5
Cadets dataset, it stays within an acceptable range. On the
# E5 Cadets dataset, all competing methods, except KAIROS,
exhibit unsatisfactory FNR performance. The performance
degradation on the # E5 Cadets dataset can be attributed
to its higher diversity and noise level, which make it more
challenging for provenance-graph–based approaches to capture
consistent behavioral patterns.
In the # E5 Theia scenario, TraceCluster achieves a Precision of 0.97 and a Recall of 0.94. These results indicate
that the model effectively identifies positive samples while
maintaining controlled false positives. In the Trace scenario,
TraceCluster achieved nearly perfect results, with all key
metrics reaching 0.99, highlighting the model’s exceptional
ability to distinguish between positive and negative samples
while keeping the false negative rate extremely low.
The superior performance of TraceCluster can be attributed
to the following factors. Firstly, Through the attention mechanism, SAN assigns varying weights to neighboring nodes,
allowing the model to focus more effectively on critical nodes.
Secondly, the introduction of class weight balancing plays a
positive role in addressing imbalanced datasets. In scenarios where class imbalance exists, the weighting mechanism
enhances the model’s ability to identify minority classes,
reducing the problem of minority samples being overlooked,
and thereby improving Recall.
In terms of FPR and FNR, TraceCluster demonstrates high
accuracy in distinguishing between normal and attack samples.
In # E3 Trace and # E3 Fivedirections datasets, its FPRs are
0.01 and 0.0001, respectively, which are significantly lower
than those of other models, indicating its higher stability and
precision. The model effectively reduces false positives and
improves the reliability of attack detection. Additionally, its
sensitivity in detecting attack samples is also remarkable, with
FNRs of 0.01 in the # E5 Trace datasets, which are much
lower than those of other models, highlighting its advantages
in increasing recall and reducing false negatives.
However, TraceCluster also has certain limitations. In the
# E5 Cadets scenario, for instance, TraceCluster exhibits a
relatively low Recall of 0.80, compared to the best-performing
detection model (e.g., KAIROS) at 1.00. This suggests that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: TraceCluster: A LIGHTWEIGHT AND ADAPTIVE CLUSTERING-BASED SAN

1075

TABLE V
C OMPARISON OF P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS ON S TREAM S POT DATASET

TABLE VI
E VALUATED U NDER S IX D IFFERENT ATTACK S CENARIOS OF DARPA TC # E3 AND # E5. A LL VALUES A RE R EPORTED IN P ERCENTAGES , AND THE B EST
R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD . FPR: FALSE P OSITIVE R ATE , R EFERRING TO THE P ROPORTION OF N ORMAL S AMPLES I NCORRECTLY
C LASSIFIED AS ATTACK S AMPLES ; FNR: FALSE N EGATIVE R ATE , R EFERRING TO THE P ROPORTION OF ATTACK S AMPLES
I NCORRECTLY C LASSIFIED AS N ORMAL S AMPLES

TraceCluster may miss some positive samples, failing to
capture all correct instances. This shortcoming might arise
from the SAN, which is heavily based on node-specific feature
representations.
3) Comparison and Analysis of Detection Performance
on DARPA OpTC Dataset: In the OpTC dataset, we compare TraceCluster with FLASH based on the reproduction
results achieved using the official FLASH implementation.
The experimental results are shown in Table VII. TraceCluster
exhibits a more balanced detection capability in both attack
scenarios, with significantly higher Recall, F1-scores and FNR
than FLASH. Compared with its relatively lower FNR, the
TraceCluster exhibits a slightly higher FPR than FLASH.

Nevertheless, in two evaluation scenarios, the FPR are merely
0.007% and 0.008%, which are practically negligible. Hence,
the overall detection performance demonstrates a superior
trade-off between accuracy and efficiency. This indicates that
TraceCluster is more reliable in detecting a wider range of
malicious activities, especially in large-scale or covert attacks.
C. Comparison of Time Consumption for Inferring on
DARPA OpTC Dataset
Figure 5 presents a comparison of inference latency between
TraceCluster and FLASH under two representative attack scenarios in DARPA OpTC Dataset. TraceCluster enables parallel
inference on partitioned subgraphs, significantly reducing the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1076

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

TABLE VII
C OMPARISON OF P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS B ETWEEN T RACE C LUSTER AND FLASH ON THE DARPA O P TC DATASET

Fig. 5. Comparison of inference time on OpTC dataset.

inference time. Specifically, it achieves inference times of
0.61 s and 0.79 s in the two scenarios, which are substantially lower than FLASH’s 22.66 s and MEGR-APT’s 2.4 s,
representing approximately 37-fold and 3-fold, respectively.
We further analyze the reason behind FLASH’s slower
inference. The main factor lies in its use of a heterogeneous
two-stage inference pipeline. During deployment, FLASH
does not perform end-to-end inference via a GNN; instead,
it relies on node embeddings pregenerated by a trained GNN
model, which are stored in a key-value database. At runtime,
the system retrieves these embeddings, combines them with
Word2Vec representations of the input events to form feature
vectors, and feeds them into an XGBoost classifier for anomaly
detection. This process introduces additional delays due to
embedding retrieval, feature composition, and external model
invocation, resulting in higher overall latency. In contrast,
our TraceCluster offers a streamlined inference path and is
therefore more suitable for timely detection tasks.
D. Impact of Subgraph Partitioning on TraceCluster
Figure 6 shows the experimental results with different
numbers of clusters on the DARPA TC # E3 and # E5 datasets.
The results indicate that subgraph partitioning significantly
improves model performance, although the sensitivity to the
number of partitions varies between scenarios. As can be
observed, TraceCluster exhibits high sensitivity to the number
of clusters on the # E3 and # E5 datasets. When the number
of clusters is less than 6, the F1-score Mean, Precision Mean,
and Recall Mean all increase with the growing number of
clusters. In a few scenarios (e.g., # E3 Trace and # E5 Cadets),

these metrics show an upward trend when the number of
clusters reaches 8. However, for most other scenarios, when
the number of clusters exceeds 6, the metrics either decline or
remain roughly the same as those recorded when the number of
clusters is 6. The experimental results indicate that setting the
number of clusters K to 6 yields the best overall performance.
Partitioning is executed once per constructed traceability
graph snapshot and can be cached and reused if multiple
inference runs or queries are performed on the same snapshot, thereby allowing its cost to be amortized in practical
deployment settings.
In conclusion, a well-designed subgraph partitioning strategy helps models better capture the structural information
of the data, significantly enhancing prediction accuracy and
generalization capability, thus providing deeper insights for
tasks in complex scenarios.
E. Selection of Learning Rate for Model Training
As shown in Figure. 8, in this experiment, we select a
learning rate of 10−2 . This learning rate iss chosen based
on multiple experiments and comparative analysis, as it
effectively balances model stability and convergence speed.
Specifically, while smaller learning rates (e.g., 10−3 or lower)
are stable, they lead to slower convergence, and larger learning
rates (e.g., 10−1 or higher) can cause training instability or
oscillations. Through preliminary experiments, we consider
that a learning rate of 10−2 avoids excessive oscillations and
ensures performance improvement in the # E3 scenarios,
which is why it is selected as the final learning rate setting.
F. Selection of Threshold
We refer to the threshold selection strategies described in
ThreaTrace [8], KAIROS [14] and FLASH [1]. All three
works adopt a fixed-threshold approach. Therefore, we follow
the same strategy in our implementation. In addition, we
employ a search strategy to determine the optimal values of
three hyperparameters, namely the learning rate, the number
of clusters, and the threshold. We present the results of the
threshold selection experiments under the optimal learning
rate 10−2 and clustering settings (K= 6). From Figure. 7, we
observe that setting the threshold to 0.5 yields a good tradeoff
among Precision, Recall, and F1-score for TraceCluster on the
# E3 dataset.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: TraceCluster: A LIGHTWEIGHT AND ADAPTIVE CLUSTERING-BASED SAN

1077

Fig. 6. Experimental results with different numbers of clusters on DARPA TC # E3 dataset and # E5 dataset.

Fig. 7. Experimental results with different scene thresholds on the DARPA TC# E3 dataset.

Fig. 8. Learning rate adjustment and effects in # E3 dataset.

G. Ablation Study on the Key Modules
To study the necessity of each portion of our approach, we
replace the TraceCluster modules with other relative methods
to observe how the model performance degrades.
We conduct ablation experiments as follows. First, we
evaluate the detection efficiency when SAN is replaced by
Cluster-GCN or GraphSAGE used in ThreaTrace. Next, we
evaluate the detection efficiency of model variants where the
attention mechanism or the clustering mechanism is removed.
Finally, we evaluate the necessity of a designed weighting
function, by removing weight setting and by setting the
balanced sample weights.

We conducted experiments on three scenarios from the TC
# E3 dataset. The experimental results (Table VIII) reveal
significant performance differences.
Based on the analysis of experimental results, the SAN
demonstrates the most stable performance across various scenarios, excelling in handling complex graph structures and
fine-grained features. GraphSAGE follows closely as a strong
alternative, particularly benefiting from its feature aggregation
capability. In contrast, the performance of the GCN model
declines as the complexity of the scenarios increases, reflecting
its limitations in feature modelling. Without graph partitioning,
the detection performance degrades significantly, indicating
that subgraph clustering for feature extraction is essential.
Adaptive catagory weighting mechanism enables TraceCluster
to achieve superior detection performance, since the model is
highly sensitive to correct class recognition.
To validate the feature extraction method we propose, we
compare it with the node embedding method based on node
types. The One-Hot encoding method [39] is employed for
node embedding. It converts node types into feature vectors,
focusing mainly on node type information while neglecting the interactions between the node and its neighbors.
The experimental results, as shown in Table VIII, demonstrate that our feature extraction method, by providing more
structural information, can better capture the interactions
between nodes, thereby improving the ability to detect attack
behaviors.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1078

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

TABLE VIII
T HE I MPACT OF D IFFERENT M ODULES IN T RACE C LUSTER

Fig. 9. Performance comparison of models with and without subgraph
partitioning.

Focal Loss performes slightly lower than SMOTE in recall,
it shows similar performance to the Class Weight function
in terms of precision and F1-score, making it a competitive
alternative. Overall, the Class Weight function shows superior
performance in terms of classification stability, making it
suitable for tasks requiring higher precision.
I. Resource Consumption During TraceCluster Execution

TABLE IX
C OMPARISON OF E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF C LASS W EIGHT F UNCTION ,
SMOTE M ETHOD , AND F OCAL L OSS

H. Study of Different Catagory Weighting Methods
In this experiment, we compare the performance of the Class
Weight function, SMOTE method [40], and Focal Loss [41]
across three scenes in the # E3 dataset and two scenes in
the OpTC dataset. As shown in Table IX, the Class Weight
function demonstrates better performance in terms of both
precision and recall across the three scenes. For example, in
the # E3 Trace scene, the Class Weight function achieves a
precision of 0.98 and recall of 0.95, outperforming SMOTE
(precision 0.97, recall 0.93). Although SMOTE showes a
slight advantage in recall, the Class Weight function generally
yields more stable and accurate results. In addition, while

In this section, we primarily discuss the impact of subgraph
partitioning on the efficiency of the model. The evaluation
focuses on resource consumption, including the number of
nodes before and after subgraph partitioning, memory usage,
and CPU utilization during the training process. We use the
# E3 FiveDirections dataset, and the experimental results are
as follows. Figure 9 shows the performance comparison of
models with and without subgraph partitioning.
By applying subgraph partitioning, the average memory
consumption decreases from 16,500MB to 12,700MB, representing a reduction of approximately 24%. This effectively
alleviated memory pressure during large-scale graph computation. Without subgraph partitioning, CPU utilization exhibits
significant fluctuations and peaks, leading to heavier computational loads for individual tasks. However, after applying
subgraph partitioning, the computational tasks become more
distributed, significantly reducing the workload. At the same
time, CPU utilization becomes lower and more stable, decreasing from a peak of 5% to 3%, a reduction of 40%.
According to our experimental results, we consider that
subgraph partitioning not only effectively reduces memory
usage and CPU load but also significantly improves the
efficiency and stability of large-scale graph computations.
Subgraph partitioning enables a more balanced allocation of
computational resources, reducing resource bottlenecks and
task imbalance. This provides a more efficient and scalable
solution for training large-scale graph neural networks.
J. Analysis of Real-World Enterprise Logs
To evaluate the effectiveness of TraceCluster in a real-world
enterprise environment, we conduct an open-world evaluation
on an anonymized cyber range. The range serves the network
security lifecycle management system of a Supercomputing
Center. It supports the center’s requirements for network
security testing, attack–defense exercises, research validation,
and professional training.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: TraceCluster: A LIGHTWEIGHT AND ADAPTIVE CLUSTERING-BASED SAN

The range consists of 17 servers, each running CentOS
7.9 with Intel Xeon Gold 5218 processors (2 × 16 cores),
512GB of memory, and over 8TB of disk space. The evaluation
spans 8 days, with the first 6 days dedicated to collecting
normal behavior data and establishing a baseline model, while
the final 2 days involve injecting known attack scenarios,
including privilege escalation by exploiting the vulnerability
CVE-2021-4034 and CVE-2021-3156, and remote command
execution by CVE-2017-9791, for detection and evaluation.
System logs and process behavior data are collected using
CamFlow to build the baseline model for normal behavior.
Approximately 150GB of relevant log data are produced per
server per day. The model’s performance is then evaluated
based on key metrics, including Precision, Recall, False Positive Rate, and F1-score, providing a comprehensive assessment
of its effectiveness.
Results and Analysis:We evaluate TraceCluster’s performance in attack detection, and the results show an accuracy
of 68% and a recall of 50%. Although TraceCluster performs
reasonably well in a controlled laboratory environment, its
effectiveness in a real production environment falls short
of expectations. The accuracy of 68% indicates that most
predictions are correct; however, due to data imbalance, the
model tends to favor normal behavior and fails to effectively
detect attack behaviors. The Recall of 50% means it misses
half of the attack events, primarily due to the variability
of attack patterns across different environments, which hinders its ability to adapt to these changes. The F1-score of
0.576 reflects TraceCluster’s imbalance between accuracy and
recall, which impacts overall performance.
The diversity of attack patterns causes the same attack to
manifest differently across different operating systems and
hardware, affecting the recall rate. Additionally, noise and
interference in real environments, such as system updates
and network fluctuations, are often misclassified as attacks,
increasing the detection difficulty. The model struggles to
adapt to the constantly changing attack strategies in production environments, while the complexity of normal behavior
and the instability of data quality further limit its detection
performance and generalization ability.
VII. D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATION
A. Real-Time Detection Constraints
Although TraceCluster significantly reduces inference time
compared with FLASH, achieving real-time APT detection
in large-scale distributed systems still imposes substantial
computational pressure. Partitioning, training, and processing
continuously evolving provenance graphs introduce additional overhead, which becomes particularly evident in highly
dynamic environments with high event throughput. In this
work, we have investigated incremental and streaming variants
of TraceCluster, and observed that introducing new nodes
or edges after subgraph partitioning disrupts existing partitions and the underlying pipeline assumptions, necessitating
complete repartitioning. Experimental results show that such
incremental subgraph partitioning and model update mechanisms substantially degrade detection efficiency. In future

1079

work, we plan to explore dynamic subgraph update mechanisms to enhance TraceCluster’s adaptability to continuously
incoming data streams.
B. Interpretability and Analyst Usability
Despite its strong detection performance, TraceCluster, like
many graph neural network–based systems, operates as a black
box. The subgraph attention mechanism provides implicit
interpretability at the feature level, but it does not directly
yield causal explanations or reconstruct complete attack
chains. Enhancing interpretability, for instance, through attention visualization, provenance-based reasoning, or graph-level
explanation modules, would increase the practical usability of
TraceCluster in security operations.
C. Assumption of Complete and Trustworthy Provenance
Collection
APT actors are capable of obfuscating collected log
data through malicious tactics such as log tampering, event
dropping, and inserting benign-looking edges into the provenance graph. In such adversarial settings, not only our
proposed model but also a majority of the aforementioned
state-of-the-art methods are likely to suffer from performance
degradation or even complete failure. Considering this gap, we
posit that strategies such as edge pruning and node aggregation
hold substantial promise for mitigating the adverse impacts of
untrustworthy log data. Exploring the design and optimization of these countermeasures will therefore constitute a key
direction of our future research efforts.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
The proposed TraceCluster demonstrates significant
advancements in addressing APT attack detection on largescale provenance graphs. By integrating the clustering-based
subgraph attention network, class weighting mechanisms,
and graph partitioning techniques, TraceCluster significantly
improves detection efficiency and accuracy.
In addition, TraceCluster reduces computational overhead through subgraph partitioning, allowing large-scale data
processing while maintaining effective detection of attack
behaviors. Its lightweight design yields significant efficiency
gains, outperforming faster lightweight node-level detectors by
37-fold and 3-fold faster inference on the OpTC dataset.
Future work will focus on improving TraceCluster in three
aspects. First, we plan to enhance scalability to support realtime detection in dynamic environments. Second, we will
improve model interpretability to provide clearer and more
actionable insights for security analysts. Finally, we will
investigate the problem of APT detection under the conditions
of unreliable traceability data, training data drift, and structural
changes.
R EFERENCES
[1]

M. Ur Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. Ul Hassan, “Flash: A comprehensive
approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation
learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2024,
pp. 3552–3570.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1080

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]
[19]
[20]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

D. Beyer and A. Fararooy, “A simple and effective measure for complex low-level dependencies,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Conf. Program
Comprehension, Jun. 2010, pp. 80–83.
I. Stellios, P. Kotzanikolaou, M. Psarakis, C. Alcaraz, and J. Lopez, “A
survey of IoT-enabled cyberattacks: Assessing attack paths to critical
infrastructures and services,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20,
no. 4, pp. 3453–3495, 4th Quart., 2018.
D. Shan, X. Du, W. Wang, N. Wang, and A. Liu, “KPI-HGNN:
Key provenance identification based on a heterogeneous graph neural
network for big data access control,” Inf. Sci., vol. 659, Feb. 2024, Art.
no. 120059.
S. M. Milajerdi, B. Eshete, R. Gjomemo, and V. N. Venkatakrishnan,
“POIROT: Aligning attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber
threat hunting,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
Nov. 2019, pp. 1795–1812.
S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. N. Venkatakrishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of
suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP),
May 2019, pp. 1137–1152.
X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “Unicorn:
Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in
Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–18.
S. Wang et al., “THREATRACE: Detecting and tracing host-based
threats in node level through provenance graph learning,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 3972–3987, 2022.
R. Guo, L. Cheng, J. Li, P. R. Hahn, and H. Liu, “A survey of learning
causality with data: Problems and methods,” ACM Comput. Surveys,
vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1–37, Jul. 2021.
H. Studiawan, F. Sohel, and C. Payne, “Anomaly detection in operating system logs with deep learning-based sentiment analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2136–2148,
Sep. 2021.
F. Liu, Y. Wen, D. Zhang, X. Jiang, X. Xing, and D. Meng, “Log2vec:
A heterogeneous graph embedding based approach for detecting cyber
threats within enterprise,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2019, pp. 1777–1794.
X. Zhang et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on unstable log
data,” in Proc. 27th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp.
Found. Softw. Eng., Aug. 2019, pp. 807–817.
E. Manzoor, S. M. Milajerdi, and L. Akoglu, “Fast memory-efficient
anomaly detection in streaming heterogeneous graphs,” in Proc. 22nd
ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2016,
pp. 1035–1044.
Z. Cheng et al., “Kairos: Practical intrusion detection and investigation
using whole-system provenance,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy
(SP), May 2024, pp. 3533–3551.
A. Aly, S. Iqbal, A. Youssef, and E. Mansour, “MEGR-APT:
A memory-efficient APT hunting system based on attack representation learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
pp. 5257–5271, 2024.
B. Jiang et al., “Orthrus: Achieving high quality of attribution in
provenance-based intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. Secur. Symp.
(USENIX Secur.), 2025, pp. 7173–7192.
T. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2016, pp. 1–14. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=SJU4ayYgl
W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2017, pp. 1025–1035.
F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, and G. Monfardini,
“The graph neural network model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 61–80, Jan. 2008.
J. Chen, T. Ma, and C. Xiao, “FastGCN: Fast learning with graph
convolutional networks via importance sampling,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2018, pp. 1–15.

[21] J. Chen, J. Zhu, and L. Song, “Stochastic training of graph convolutional
networks with variance reduction,” in Proc. 32nd Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), 2017, pp. 1–11.
[22] W.-L. Chiang, X. Liu, S. Si, Y. Li, S. Bengio, and C.-J. Hsieh,
“Cluster-GCN: An efficient algorithm for training deep and large graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2019, pp. 257–266.
[23] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
[24] Y. Shen, E. Mariconti, P.-A. Vervier, and G. Stringhini, “Tiresias:
Predicting security events through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
Conf. Comput. Commun. Security (CCS), 2018, pp. 592–605.
[25] Y. Yu, X. Si, C. Hu, and J. Zhang, “A review of recurrent neural
networks: LSTM cells and network architectures,” Neural Comput.,
vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 1235–1270, Jul. 2019.
[26] B. Xia, J. Yin, J. Xu, and Y. Li, “LogGAN: A sequence-based generative
adversarial network for anomaly detection based on system logs,” in Science of Cyber Security. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019, pp. 61–76.
[27] T. Li, X. Liu, W. Qiao, X. Zhu, Y. Shen, and J. Ma, “T-trace:
Constructing the APTs provenance graphs through multiple syslogs
correlation,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 3,
pp. 1179–1195, May 2024.
[28] M. Togninalli, E. Ghisu, F. Llinares-López, B. Rieck, and K. Borgwardt,
“Wasserstein Weisfeiler–Lehman graph kernels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 6439–6449.
[29] J. Zhou, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, W. Zhao, and Y. Li, “Provg-searcher: A
graph representation learning approach for efficient provenance graph
search,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 887–900,
May 2020.
[30] F. Dong et al., “DISTDET: A cost-effective distributed cyber threat
detection system,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.),
2023, pp. 6575–6592.
[31] J. Zengy et al., “SHADEWATCHER: Recommendation-guided cyber
threat analysis using system audit records,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
Privacy (SP), May 2022, pp. 489–506.
[32] S. Li et al., “NODLINK: An online system for fine-grained APT attack
detection and investigation,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
2024, pp. 1–18.
[33] G. Karypis and V. Kumar, “Multilevel algorithms for multi-constraint
graph partitioning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM SC98 Conf., Nov. 1998, p. 28.
[34] T. Pasquier et al., “Practical whole-system provenance capture,” in Proc.
Symp. Cloud Comput., Sep. 2017, pp. 405–418.
[35] B. W. Kernighan and S. Lin, “An efficient heuristic procedure for
partitioning graphs,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 291–307,
Feb. 1970.
[36] L.-T. Liu, M.-T. Kuo, S.-C. Huang, and C.-K. Cheng, “A gradient
method on the initial partition of fiduccia-mattheyses algorithm,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Aided Design (ICCAD), Nov. 1995,
pp. 229–234.
[37] B. Jacob, P. Larson, and B. H. Leitao, “Systemtap: Instrumenting the
Linux kernel for analyzing performance and functional problems,” IBM
Redpaper, Jan. 2025. [Online]. Available: http://www.redbooks.ibm.com/
abstracts/redp4469.html
[38] A. D. Keromytis. (2018). Transparent Computing Engagement 3 Data
Release. Accessed: Aug. 10, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://github.
com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-Computing/blob/ master/READMEE3.md
[39] Y. Bengio, R. Ducharme, P. Vincent, and C. Jauvin, “A neural probabilistic language model,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 3, pp. 1137–1155,
Feb. 2003.
[40] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer,
“SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique,” J. Artif. Intell.
Res., vol. 16, pp. 321–357, Jun. 2002.
[41] T. Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollr, “Focal loss for
dense object detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 42,
pp. 318–327, 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on June 14,2026 at 12:40:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

