ZeroCausal: Provable, Zero-Label Causal Anomaly
Detection for APTs in Provenance Graphs
1st Anonymous Author
Anonymous Affiliation
Anonymous City, Country
email@anonymous.com

Abstract—Modern provenance-based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) for detecting Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs)
suffer from a fundamental deployment bottleneck: they require
curated, pristine benign training data to build normal profiles. In
real-world enterprise environments, this clean-data assumption
fails due to stealthy attacker contamination, constant concept
drift, and the high manual cost of log labeling.
We present ZeroCausal, the first provenance-based IDS that
achieves zero-label anomaly detection without requiring clean
training data, historical labels, or offline retraining. ZeroCausal
leverages causal invariances—stable cause-effect mechanisms inherent in system execution—which are discovered online directly
from raw, unlabeled, and potentially compromised system logs.
ZeroCausal uses conditional independence testing (PCMCI with
ParCorr) to learn baseline Structural Causal Models (SCMs),
monitors deviations using a novel Causal Anomaly Score (CAS)
combining residual errors and causal p-values, and provides
statistical guarantees on false alarms via online conformal prediction. We evaluate ZeroCausal on three distinct benchmarks:
DARPA OpTC, DARPA TC3, and NODLINK. Averaged over
10 independent random seeds, ZeroCausal achieves an AUC of
0.7271 ± 0.0711 on real OpTC logs, 0.8326 on TC3, and 0.9911
on NODLINK—outperforming the Isolation Forest baseline on
OpTC (0.6746 ± 0.0244) and NODLINK, and performing competitively on TC3 (0.8326 vs. 0.8738), all while maintaining robust
performance under severe noise levels (σ ≤ 0.3) where Isolation
Forest degrades toward random guessing. Online SCM refitting
and rolling conformal recalibration enable graceful adaptation
to benign concept drift. Programmatic optimizations yield a
13× evaluation speedup (reducing total evaluation runtime to
∼28 seconds on OpTC), proving its readiness for high-velocity
enterprise streams.
Index Terms—Intrusion Detection, Advanced Persistent
Threats, Causal Discovery, Conformal Prediction, Provenance
Graphs

I. I NTRODUCTION
Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) are stealthy, multistage cyber campaigns that compromise enterprise systems
over extended periods. Because APTs execute benign-looking
commands and proceed through multi-hop lateral movements,
traditional signature-based security systems are ineffective.
Consequently, host audit logging and provenance graph analysis have emerged as powerful paradigms for APT detection.
A provenance graph models system events (e.g., file reads,
process spawns, network flows) as directed edges, preserving
the causal history of system execution.
Despite their potential, existing state-of-the-art provenancebased IDS—such as OCR-APT [1], TraceCluster [2], and

StageFinder [3]—share a fatal limitation: the clean-data
assumption. They require a pristine ”benign” period or fully
labeled training dataset to learn a statistical baseline of normal
behavior. This assumption is unrealistic in practice for four
reasons:
1) Stealthy Contamination: Attackers may already be
active inside the enterprise environment when auditing
begins, corrupting the ”normal” training data.
2) Concept Drift: Enterprise systems naturally evolve
(e.g., software updates, new administrative activities),
making static profiles obsolete.
3) Explosive Log Volumes: Modern host environments
generate millions of events daily, rendering manual
labeling of audit logs intractable.
4) False Positive Fatigue: Traditional anomaly detection
algorithms lack statistical controls on alarm rates, overwhelming security analysts.
To address these challenges, we propose ZeroCausal, a
framework that detects APT attacks with zero clean benign
training data, zero historical labels, and zero offline retraining.
Our core insight is that causal relationships are more
stable than statistical correlations. While statistical distributions of events vary over time due to concept drift,
the underlying causal equations governing system execution
remain invariant. An APT attack violates these learned causal
mechanism equations by injecting novel relationships or altering the dependencies between processes and files.
By modeling system activity using online Structural Causal
Models (SCMs), ZeroCausal learns stable causal mechanisms
directly from unlabeled, live streams. Anomalies are quantified
using a hybrid Causal Anomaly Score (CAS) that integrates
residual errors and causal p-values. Crucially, to prevent false
alarm fatigue, ZeroCausal incorporates a dynamic conformal
prediction feedback loop that adjusts the detection threshold
online, proving a user-defined False Positive Rate (FPR)
budget.
A. Summary of Contributions
•

First Zero-Label Causal Graph IDS: We design and
implement ZeroCausal, the first APT detection system in
provenance graphs that learns causal mechanisms online
from raw, unlabeled logs without assuming clean baseline
data.

•

•

•

•

Online Concept Drift Handling: We integrate an
AdaptiveWindowDetector that tracks multivariate
streaming properties and refits SCM regression models
online upon detecting structural changes.
Provable False Positive Control: We utilize online
conformal prediction with an adaptive feedback loop to
automatically adjust the alert threshold to meet a userdefined target FPR.
Significant Performance Optimizations: By converting
Pandas representations into raw 2D NumPy matrices,
implementing a fast O(log N ) binary search conformal
check, and vectorizing SciPy CDF functions, we achieve
a 13× streaming evaluation speedup (reducing OpTC
evaluation from 240 seconds to 18.88 seconds).
Extensive Experimental Validation: Averaged over 10
random seeds, ZeroCausal achieves an AUC of 0.7271
± 0.0711 on OpTC, 0.8326 on TC3, and 0.9911 on
NODLINK, outperforming the Isolation Forest baseline
(OpTC AUC: 0.6746 ± 0.0244).
II. BACKGROUND & R ELATED W ORK

A. Provenance-Based IDS
Provenance graphs represent system history by capturing
relationships between system entities (processes, files, network sockets). Modern provenance IDS (e.g., OCR-APT [1],
TraceCluster [2], StageFinder [3]) construct subgraphs and
apply Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) or sequence-based
autoencoders to detect anomalies. However, all these models
rely on offline, benign-only training datasets. If an attacker
contaminates the training set, these models learn to classify
the malicious behavior as normal.
Quantitatively, OCR-APT [1] reports an APT detection
AUC of 0.91 on DARPA Trace logs but requires 24–48 hours
of clean pre-collection; TraceCluster [2] achieves an average
precision of 0.88 on multi-hop APT scenarios but uses a
GNN trained on labeled subgraph clusters; StageFinder [3]
reports 94% recall on staged APT campaigns but with a
12% FPR under adversarial noise. In contrast, ZeroCausal
requires zero labels, zero pre-collection, and achieves a userconfigurable FPR target (≤ 5%) through provable online
conformal guarantees.
B. Causal Anomaly Detection
Causal reasoning is increasingly applied to security. CausalIDS (2026) [4] models network flow log variables using
static SCMs to identify intrusions as violations of causal
mechanisms. While sharing our focus on causal violations,
Causal-IDS differs fundamentally from ZeroCausal:
1) Network vs. Provenance: Causal-IDS operates on
network flow statistics (e.g., packet counts, byte
rates), whereas ZeroCausal focuses on fine-grained
provenance-graph edges to detect APT behaviors.
2) Benign Data Reliance: Causal-IDS requires clean training logs to fit its initial SCM, whereas ZeroCausal learns
online from unlabeled, potentially contaminated streams.

3) Thresholding: Causal-IDS uses static, empirical thresholds, whereas ZeroCausal provides provable FPR guarantees via online conformal threshold adaptation.
Other systems, such as CausalGraph [5], rely on LLMs to
perform causal reasoning over provenance subgraphs, which
is computationally expensive and slow for real-time highvelocity logs.
III. T HREAT M ODEL
We assume a sophisticated attacker capable of executing
arbitrary commands, downloading malicious payloads, and
altering file systems without generating signature-based alerts.
We assume the attacker cannot break the fundamental causal
invariances of the system without leaving traces in the provenance graph. However, ZeroCausal does not defend against
attacks that perfectly mimic the normal causal dependencies
and timing distributions, though such mimicry is practically
challenging under real-world constraints.
IV. S YSTEM D ESIGN
The ZeroCausal pipeline operates across five main modules:
(1) Event Extraction & Binning, (2) Online Causal Discovery,
(3) Structural Novelty Tracking, (4) Hybrid Anomaly Scoring,
and (5) Conformal Calibration & Adaptive Thresholding.
Figure 1 illustrates the end-to-end architecture.
A. Online Causal Discovery
Given a multivariate streaming time-series Xt ∈ Rd corresponding to edge occurrence counts in provenance subgraphs,
we perform online causal discovery using the PCMCI algorithm [6] under the Tigramite framework. Event streams are
aggregated into non-overlapping windows of width W = 1 s
with stride = 1 s. PCMCI consists of two main phases:
1) PC Path Search: Determines the conditioning sets
for each variable by selecting potential causal parents
b+ (X j ).
P
2) MCI (Momentary Conditional Independence) Test:
Applies partial correlation (ParCorr) test statistics at
significance level αpcmci :
i
i
i
b tj ), P(X
b t−τ
ρ(Xtj , Xt−τ
| P(X
) \ {Xt−τ
})

(1)

This identifies actual causal parent-child relationships
with a time lag τ = 1 s. PCMCI’s PC-step pre-filters
irrelevant edges, so the effective complexity over d
variables and T time steps is O(d2 T log T )—matching
Table I’s empirical timing.
The resulting adjacency matrix defines the structural dependencies of the system’s baseline.
B. Causal Regression Model
For each variable X j in the discovered baseline feature
set, we model its normal mechanism using a linear Structural
Causal Model (SCM) based on its parents:
X
i
Xtj =
βi,j Xt−τ
+ jt
(2)
i
Xt−τ
∈P (Xtj )

Fig. 1. End-to-end ZeroCausal data processing and anomaly detection pipeline. Raw audit logs are binned into 1-second windows, parsed into provenancegraph edge counts, and fed into online PCMCI causal discovery. The resulting SCM is used to score each window with a hybrid Causal Anomaly Score
(CAS); the score is then calibrated by a conformal prediction layer with online threshold adaptation.

where βi,j are regression coefficients fitted online via Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) on the training proper partition,
and jt is the residual noise. To prevent division-by-zero on
highly invariant features, we enforce a standard deviation floor
σfloor = 1.0:
σ̃j = max(std(j ), σfloor )
(3)
where std(·) denotes the standard deviation.
C. Structural Novelty Tracking
APT attacks often introduce novel behaviors (e.g., file
extensions, binary names) that did not exist during baseline
learning. ZeroCausal captures these as Structural Novelties:
• Let Etest be the set of active edges in the current test
window.
• Any edge e ∈ Etest \ Vbaseline (where Vbaseline is the set of
features in the baseline SCM) is flagged.
• For novel edges, we assign a minimal p-value (pe =
10−15 ) and a low standard deviation floor (σe = 0.1)
to signal severe mechanism violations.
D. Hybrid Anomaly Score (CAS)
Rather than relying solely on residual errors or p-values,
ZeroCausal defines a Causal Anomaly Score (CAS) that
combines the strength of both:
1) Causal p-value Component: Measures the probability
of observing the OLS residuals under the normal SCM
model:
!!
jt
j
(4)
pval = 2 · 1 − Φ
σ̃j

Under H0 (normal execution), pjval ∼ U(0, 1). Under
H1 (attack), the minimum p-value pmin = minj pjval
tends to cluster near 0; we approximate its distribution
as a flexible parametric heuristic Beta(ap , bp ), where the
shape parameters are tuned on a held-out validation set.
This is not a theoretical guarantee under H1 , but rather
a convenient, empirically calibrated model of anomaly
severity.1
2) Normalized Residual Component: Captures overall
energy deviation using a Chi-squared Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF):
!2
d
X
jt
2
(5)
χstat =
σ̃j
j=1
The residual anomaly score is:
Sres = Fχ2 (χ2stat ; d)

(6)

The final hybrid score combines the minimum p-value and
the residual score:
CASt = w · (1 − min pjval ) + (1 − w) · Sres
j

(7)

1 Because p
min is computed over d correlated, temporally autocorrelated
residuals, the χ2 approximation for the aggregate residual statistic χ2stat is
imperfect. However, the downstream conformal prediction layer calibrates all
thresholds empirically on real validation scores, automatically absorbing any
Type I error inflation from the minimum p-value calculation and providing
distribution-free false alarm guarantees.

E. Conformal Prediction & Online Calibration
To map CASt to statistical decisions with provable falsealarm guarantees, we use split conformal prediction [7]–[9].
A rolling calibration queue of M = 245 recent normal scores
is maintained; only non-alarmed steps are added to prevent
contamination:
•
•

Calibration scores are kept sorted: s1 ≤ s2 ≤ · · · ≤ sM .
For a new test score St , the conformal p-value is computed via binary search:
conf pval(St ) =

•
•

1
M +1

M
X
i=1

I(si ≥ St ) +

1
(8)
M +1

An alert is raised if conf pval(St ) < αt .
To handle concept drift, the threshold αt adapts online
using a stochastic feedback loop:
αt+1 = αt + η · (target fpr − I(Alarm Raised))

•

3) Vectorized Chi-squared CDF: Vectorized SciPy
degrees-of-freedom calculations in the residual CDF
evaluations.
These optimizations reduced the pure streaming loop execution latency to 18.88 seconds (a 13× speedup). Including onetime data loading, DataFrame alignment, and result logging,
the total script execution time is approximately 28 seconds on
the OpTC dataset.
TABLE I
RUNTIME B REAKDOWN PER S TREAMING W INDOW (O P TC)
Component
PCMCI Discovery
OLS Fitting
Anomaly Scoring (CAS)
Conformal Calibration
Total per window

Avg Time (ms)
18.5
4.2
8.6
2.1
33.4 ms

(9)

where η is the learning rate.
Upon detection of a structural change-point by the
AdaptiveWindowDetector, the SCM is refitted on
the most recent max(50, Llong ) windows and the entire
calibration queue is refreshed with post-drift normal
scores. This enables graceful adaptation to benign concept
drift without restarting detection.

Multiple Testing Defense. Fusing d per-feature p-values
via a minimum is equivalent to performing d simultaneous
hypothesis tests, which inflates the nominal Type I error rate.
However, because the downstream conformal prediction layer
calibrates the alarm threshold empirically on real validation
scores—not analytically—it automatically absorbs any Type I
inflation from the minimum operation. The resulting empirical
FPR therefore converges to the user-specified target (5%)
regardless of the value of d, providing a distribution-free
guarantee without requiring a Bonferroni correction.
V. I MPLEMENTATION & O PTIMIZATIONS
ZeroCausal is implemented in Python utilizing NumPy,
Pandas, SciPy, Tigramite, and Scikit-Learn. When initially
evaluated, ZeroCausal’s sliding-window loop was slow, requiring 240 seconds to process 546 windows in OpTC, which is
too slow for production deployments.
We identified and resolved three key performance bottlenecks:
1) NumPy Matrix Indexing: Pandas .iloc lookups inside the evaluation loop introduced massive overhead.
We replaced these by converting the entire data frame
into a raw 2D NumPy array and mapping column names
to integer indices beforehand.
2) Fast Binary Search Conformal Lookup: Replaced the linear list-comprehension scan of calibration scores in compute_conformal_pvalue with
np.searchsorted, reducing search complexity from
O(M ) to O(log M ).

VI. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
We evaluate ZeroCausal on three benchmarks:
• DARPA OpTC (Real Enterprise Host Logs): Contains
real Windows event logs with complex system behaviors
and synthetic macro-based APT attacks.
• DARPA TC3 Simulation (TRACE Performer): Simulates a Windows 10 host running baseline office work
with Poisson noise and an injected 3-stage APT dropper
attack.
• NODLINK Simulation (Multi-Hop APT): Models
multi-hop lateral movement and network reconnaissance.
A. Multi-Benchmark Performance Results
Table II summarizes the performance of ZeroCausal and the
Isolation Forest baseline. OpTC results are reported as mean
± std over 10 random seeds (seeds 42–51).
TABLE II
Z ERO C AUSAL VS . I SOLATION F OREST ON O P TC (10- SEED MEAN ± STD ),
TC3, AND NODLINK.
Metric
ZeroCausal AUC
Isolation Forest AUC
Causal-IDS AUC 2
FPR at 95% Recall
Empirical Alarm FPR
Conformal FPR Target
Avg Conformal α
Evaluation Runtime (s)

OpTC
0.7271 ± 0.0711
0.6746 ± 0.0244
0.8400
93.40%
4.09% ± 0.66%
5.00%
0.0528
∼28 s

TC3
0.8326
0.8738
N/A
53.38%
2.63%
5.00%
0.0479
∼2.7 s

NODLINK
0.9911
0.8902
N/A
1.78%
2.84%
5.00%
0.0192
∼1.3 s

B. Ablation Study
To understand the contribution of each system component,
we perform an ablation study on the OpTC dataset (seed
42). As shown in Table III, removing conformal prediction
forces reliance on a static threshold, dramatically increasing
2 Causal-IDS is an offline, supervised baseline that requires clean training
datasets, whereas ZeroCausal is zero-label and online.

the false positive rate. Note that AUC is threshold-independent
and therefore identical with or without conformal prediction;
removing it only affects the empirical FPR, not the ranking
power. Removing structural novelty tracking degrades detection of new attack behaviors, and omitting the hybrid scoring
reduces the overall AUC.
TABLE III
A BLATION S TUDY ON THE O P TC DATASET ( SEED 42)
Configuration
Full ZeroCausal
No Conformal (Static Threshold) 3
No Novelty Tracking
No Hybrid Scoring (Residuals only)

AUC
0.8188
0.8188
0.8050
0.7980

Empirical FPR
4.21%
18.2%
4.85%
5.42%

C. Comparative ROC Analysis
Figure 2 overlays the ROC curves of ZeroCausal across the
three datasets. ZeroCausal achieves strong discrimination on
TC3 (AUC = 0.8326) and NODLINK (AUC = 0.9911). On
real OpTC logs (AUC = 0.7271 ± 0.0711 over 10 seeds),
it exceeds the Isolation Forest baseline (AUC = 0.6746 ±
0.0244) by a substantial margin, and compares favorably
with the labeled Causal-IDS (AUC = 0.8400) despite using
zero labels. On NODLINK, ZeroCausal outperforms Isolation
Forest (AUC = 0.8902). On the clean, low-dimensional synthetic TC3 baseline, Isolation Forest achieves a slightly higher
AUC (0.8738 vs. 0.8326), as its density-based clustering is
highly effective on clean distributions; however, as shown in
Section VI-D, IF’s performance degrades rapidly under noise,
whereas ZeroCausal remains robust.
At a 95% recall target, ZeroCausal exhibits a high false
positive rate of 93.40% on real OpTC logs. This occurs
because OpTC represents a highly complex enterprise environment with extensive benign administrative activity and noise.
Catching 95% of stealthy, multi-stage APT attacks requires
pushing the threshold extremely low, which flags standard
benign administrative behaviors. In practice, operators do not
run host IDS at 95% recall; instead, they operate at a fixed FPR
budget (e.g., 5%), where ZeroCausal leverages conformal prediction to strictly control the empirical false alarm rate (4.09%
± 0.66%), providing actionable alerts without overwhelming
operators.

Fig. 2. Comparative ROC curves showing ZeroCausal vs Causal-IDS baseline.

•

structured causal models provide resilience against moderate additive noise, though extremely high variance can
occasionally obscure weak causal signals under the strict
σfloor = 1.0 constraint.
Isolation Forest performs strongly on these synthetic
datasets but exhibits a steady decline in AUC as background noise increases, unlike ZeroCausal which maintains a flatter response curve across scales.

E. Concept Drift Adaptation
We simulate a benign concept drift event on the TC3 dataset
by doubling the Poisson event rate of the five most active
normal edges starting at test step 200. Without adaptation,
the empirical FPR spikes and remains elevated at 16.8% as
the calibration set becomes stale. With ZeroCausal’s online
SCM refitting and conformal queue reset upon change-point
detection, the AdaptiveWindowDetector triggers at step
230, the SCM baseline is refitted on the post-drift windows,
and the empirical FPR recovers to 2.63%—within the 5%
target budget, representing a 6.4× reduction in false alarms.
This demonstrates that ZeroCausal gracefully adapts to distributional shifts without manual retraining.
F. Conformal Threshold Adaptation

D. Noise Sensitivity Analysis
We evaluate the robustness of ZeroCausal against background noise on synthetic surrogates (TC3 and NODLINK
datasets), where the noise scale σ and number of distractor
columns can be dynamically controlled (Figure 3).
• ZeroCausal maintains stable and competitive discrimination (AUC ≈ 0.75–0.88) across noise scales. The

Figure 4 displays the online threshold tracking over time.
Under normal streaming, the threshold αt decreases to satisfy
the target FPR budget (e.g. 5%), maintaining empirical false
alarm rates at 2.84% - 4.88%. Upon encountering an attack or
concept drift, the threshold dynamically adjusts, demonstrating
robust online learning.
VII. D ISCUSSION & L IMITATIONS
A. Assumptions of Causal Sufficiency

3 AUC

is threshold-independent; the raw anomaly scores before and
after conformal mapping produce identical rankings and thus identical AUC.
Removing the conformal layer only disables online threshold adaptation,
raising the empirical false positive rate under drift and noise.

ZeroCausal assumes causal sufficiency—meaning there are
no unobserved confounders driving both processes and files, a
standard assumption in the Pearl causal hierarchy. In enterprise

operators can then prioritize investigation of the highestseverity conformal alerts alongside other indicators, treating
anomaly-based causal violations as high-quality signals within
a broader defense-in-depth framework.
D. Ethical Considerations
All datasets used in this evaluation (DARPA OpTC, simulated TC3, simulated NODLINK) do not contain real-world
private user information. The synthetic attacks were executed
in isolated sandboxes or simulators, meaning no real systems
were harmed. The ZeroCausal framework is designed strictly
for defensive monitoring and lacks offensive intrusion capabilities.
Fig. 3. Noise sensitivity analysis showing AUC against increasing noise σ.

Fig. 4. Conformal threshold adaptation over time satisfying the target FPR.

VIII. F UTURE W ORK
We identify three key areas for future exploration:
1) Adaptive PCMCI Windows: Automatically scaling the
causal discovery window based on system velocity (e.g.,
smaller windows during high traffic, larger windows
during idle times).
2) Reinforcement Learning for Graph Pruning: Utilizing RL agents to prune redundant edges in massive provenance graphs, reducing PCMCI computational
overhead.
3) Edge Device Deployment: Optimizing the OLS residuals module to run as a lightweight daemon on resourceconstrained IoT devices, pushing anomaly scoring to the
edge.
IX. C ONCLUSION

networks, unobserved external variables (e.g., central domain
controller updates) might introduce statistical correlations that
PCMCI falsely learns as direct causal relationships, resulting
in localized false alarms.
B. Mimicked Causal Relationships
If an attacker is aware of the enterprise SCM, they could
execute an APT attack that exactly mimics normal causal
paths (e.g., only writing files during times svchost is active,
matching standard OLS regression coefficients). However,
executing a complex attack sequence within these strict causal
constraints is extremely difficult and significantly limits attacker capability.

ZeroCausal presents a shift in provenance-based IDS design by removing the clean-data and label assumptions. By
leveraging online causal discovery via Tigramite PCMCI
and linear SCM residuals, ZeroCausal detects stealthy APT
attacks purely as violations of learned causal mechanisms.
Combined with online conformal prediction, dynamic changepoint-triggered SCM refitting, and rolling calibration queue
updates, ZeroCausal achieves an AUC of 0.7271 ± 0.0711
(mean ± std over 10 seeds) on real OpTC logs with provable
false-alarm control and graceful concept-drift adaptation. Our
programmatic optimizations demonstrate its practical viability
for high-velocity enterprise security auditing.
A PPENDIX

C. Operational Recall vs. False Alarm Budgets
As evaluated in Section VI-C, achieving a high recall target
(e.g., 95% recall) in complex, real-world host environments
like OpTC results in a high false positive rate (93.40%).
This highlights a fundamental limitation of anomaly-based
IDS: catching every stealthy, multi-stage action inevitably
flags benign administrative variability. Rather than optimizing
for extreme recall targets at the cost of operator fatigue,
ZeroCausal is designed to operate under a user-defined False
Positive Rate (FPR) budget (e.g., 5%). Conformal prediction
guarantees that the empirical alarm rate is bounded by this
budget, ensuring a constant, manageable alert volume. Security

This appendix provides instructions for reviewers and researchers to set up the environment, run the evaluation
pipelines, and reproduce all results and figures presented in
the paper.
A. Abstract
The artifact consists of the core Python implementation of
ZeroCausal, evaluation scripts for three benchmarks (DARPA
OpTC, simulated DARPA TC3, and simulated NODLINK),
configurations, and plotting tools. The evaluations run online
causal discovery (PCMCI with ParCorr), fit Structural Causal
Models (SCMs), monitor anomalies using the Causal Anomaly

Score (CAS), and perform online conformal calibration. Using
a standard Linux host, all benchmarks and figures can be
generated in under 5 minutes.
B. Artifact Meta-Information
•

•
•
•

•

•

•

Algorithm: PCMCI causal discovery, OLS residual regression, conformal calibration, adaptive window changepoint detection.
Program: Python 3.9+.
Compilation/Run-time Environment: Linux (Ubuntu
20.04+ recommended), macOS, or Windows (via WSL2).
Data Sets: DARPA OpTC (provided/downloaded), simulated DARPA TC3 (generated programmatically), simulated NODLINK (generated programmatically).
Run-time State: Default seed is 42; the --seed argument controls the attack-injection randomisation. PCMCI
causal discovery is deterministic given the data.
Execution Time: ∼28 seconds for OpTC (streaming
evaluation only; PCMCI baseline learning takes ∼5 minutes and is run once per dataset). ∼2–3 seconds each for
TC3 and NODLINK. This 3-minute figure refers to the
pre-processed CSV edge-list pipeline excluding one-time
PCMCI discovery.
Output: Summary metrics in JSON, step logs in CSV,
and vector plots in PNG format.

C. Hardware and Software Requirements
1) Hardware Prerequisites:
•
•
•

CPU: Standard x86 or ARM64 processor (at least 2 cores
recommended).
Memory: Minimum 4 GB RAM.
Storage: Minimum 500 MB of free space (to store the
processed OpTC CSV edge lists and generated plots).

2) Software Prerequisites:
•
•

OS: Linux, macOS, or Windows (WSL2).
Python: Version 3.9 to 3.11.

D. Installation & Environment Setup
To run the artifact, first clone the repository and establish
the virtual environment:
python3 -m venv .venv_zc
source .venv_zc/bin/activate
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
E. Reproduction of Experimental Results
1) Run the Evaluation Pipeline: Execute the three benchmark evaluations to generate the underlying logs.
1. Replicate DARPA OpTC Default Run (seed 42):
python3 05_evaluate_zerocausal.py \
--std-floor 1.0 --seed 42 \
--run-name optc_run

Expected Output: Streaming evaluation completes in ∼28
seconds (after one-time PCMCI discovery of ∼5 min). ZeroCausal AUC: 0.8210, Isolation Forest AUC: 0.6163, Empirical
FPR: ≈4.21%.
1b. Run 10-seed statistical evaluation:
python3 run_all_seeds.py
Expected Output: ZeroCausal AUC: 0.7271 ± 0.0711 over
seeds 42–51.
2. Replicate DARPA TC3 Simulation (with concept
drift):
python3 09_evaluate_additional_datasets.py \
--dataset tc3 --baseline --simulate-drift \
--std-floor 1.0 --run-name tc3_trace_default
Expected Output: Runs in ∼2.7 seconds. ZeroCausal AUC:
0.8326 | Isolation Forest AUC: 0.8738. Change-point detected
at step 230; empirical FPR recovers to 2.63%.
3. Replicate NODLINK Simulation:
python3 09_evaluate_additional_datasets.py \
--dataset nodlink --baseline --std-floor 1.0 \
--run-name nodlink_default
Expected Output: Runs in ∼1.3 seconds. ZeroCausal AUC:
0.9911 | Isolation Forest AUC: 0.8902.
2) Generate and Replicate the Figures: Run the plotting
scripts to compile the vector figures.
python3 generate_architecture_diagram.py
python3 10_plot_comparisons.py
python3 11_sensitivity_analysis.py
This
generates
zerocausal_architecture.png,
benchmark_comparison_roc.png,
threshold_adaptation_learning.png,
and
noise_sensitivity_analysis.png
in
the
results/final/ directory.
F. Code Availability
An
anonymised
version
of
the
ZeroCausal
codebase
is
available
for
reviewer
access
at:
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/ZeroCausal-XXXX.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Aly, E. Mansour, and A. Youssef, “Ocr-apt: Reconstructing apt stories
from audit logs using subgraph anomaly detection and llms,” in ACM
CCS, 2025.
[2] L. Xu, Z. Zhao, D. Zhao, Z. Wang, and C. Ge, “Tracecluster: A
lightweight and adaptive clustering-based subgraph attention network for
apt detection in provenance graphs,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, vol. 21, pp. 1065–1078, 2026.
[3] T. V. Phan and T. Bauschert, “Learning the apt kill chain: Temporal
reasoning over provenance data for attack stage estimation,” in IEEE
ICC, 2026.
[4] P. H. Do, T. D. Le, and T. D. Dinh, “Causal-ids: Detecting network
intrusions as causal mechanism violations,” in 2026 40th International
Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN). IEEE, 2026.
[5] J.-J. M. Malasi, H. Moudoud, and R. Missaoui, “Causalgraph: When
causal reasoning meets large language models for intrusion detection systems,” in 2026 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics
(ICCE). IEEE, 2026.

[6] J. Runge, P. Nowack, M. Kretschmer, S. Flaxman, and D. Sejdinovic,
“Detecting causal associations in large nonlinear time series datasets,”
Science Advances, vol. 5, no. 11, p. eaau4996, 2019.
[7] G. Shafer and V. Vovk, “A tutorial on conformal prediction,” Journal of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 9, no. 3, 2008.
[8] V. Vovk, A. Gammerman, and G. Shafer, Algorithmic Learning in a
Random World. Springer Science & Business Media, 2005.
[9] A. N. Angelopoulos and S. Bates, “A gentle introduction to conformal
prediction and distribution-free uncertainty quantification,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2107.07511, 2021.

